Investigations on the Physiological Ecology of Tortula ruraliformis
By A. J. WILLIS
Department of Botany, University of Bristol

I. Introduction

Studies have been made on Tortula ruraliformis (Besch.) Rich. & Wall, with a view to elucidating the operation of physiological processes of this moss in relation to specialized features of its ecological behavior. Preliminary information concerning physiological phenomena and their rates under the
varied conditions of the habitat of the plant and with reference to the characteristic changes of the shoot system under different conditions of humidity has
been gained in this investigation, which may provide a basis for more detailed
work.
The chief phenomena studied concern the water relations of the moss and its
rates of photosynthesis and respiration under varied regimes of humidity and
water supply. Particular interest centres on the rates of gaseous exchange
under different degrees of desiccation, especially as the plant is often subject
to a big range of environmental conditions in its natural habitat. Analytical
studies made in connexion with rates of photosynthesis and respiration were
extended to provide an indication of the levels of a number of important
chemical constituents of the moss.

II. Occurrence of Tortula ruraliformis

The importance of Tortula ruraliformis as a component of the flora of
maritime sand-dune systems in Britain needs little emphasis (Watson, 1918;
Richards, 1929; Willis, Folkes, Hope-Simpson & Yemm, 1959). This moss is
also characteristic of dunes on the Continent (Gams, 1932). Typically it occurs
as carpets, sometimes almost pure, on the dry slopes of moderately stable
dunes, where sand movement is appreciable but usually insufficient to bury the
shoots completely. T. ruraliformis is, however, able to survive burial by sand
up to about 3 cm. in depth, ultimately growing up through the sand (Birse,
Landsberg & Gimingham, 1957).
As is well-known, in dry conditions the plant shrinks and the leaves inroll
around the stem in a tight spiral; on moistening, the leaves unfold and shoot
off sand grains in this process, each stem system creating its own small pit
(Richards, 1929). This feature is of obvious significance in the ecology of the
plant, and investigations were made concerning the mechanism of the leaf
movements and to establish the hydration status of the shoot systems under
different conditions of relative humidity.
T. ruraliformis grows less vigorously on stable, inland dunes, possibly
suffering adversely from competition with angiosperms. It does not occur in
areas subject to flooding for any appreciable time, and so is rarely seen in dune
slacks. Occasional shoots, blown into slacks by the wind, may root, but do
not survive for very long (Richards, 1929). Observations made at Braunton
Burrows, north Devon, support this statement (see also Willis et al. 1959,
fig. 9).
When abundant, T. ruraliformis may have important effects on the water
content of the sand of dune slopes. Under conditions of high humidity or
rain, the shoot systems expand rapidly and act as water absorbers. Consequently it is sometimes observed in summer that the sand beneath a dense
carpet of the moss is drier than elsewhere, especially if the preceding weather
has been showery. As an illustrative example, data obtained from samples
taken on Braunton Burrows on 12 August 1955 may be quoted. Sand at a
depth of 15 cm. below a vegetation dominated by T. ruraliformis was found to
have a water content of 1-6 % (expressed as a percentage of the weight of the
sand, oven-dried at 105 C), whereas sand at this depth from a bare dune crest
had a water content of 3-6 %.

III. Water relations
The water content of Tortula ruraliformis was found to vary very considerably in its natural habitat dependent on the environmental conditions. In wet
weather the moss can hold very appreciably more than its own dry weight of
water, but when droughted its water content may be as low as, for example,
15%.
The moss is poikilohydrous, there being no regulation of water loss, but
fairly quick equilibration of the water content of the moss with the humidity
conditions of the atmosphere. The levels of hydration and the time taken for
equilibrium to be reached when shoots were exposed to different relative
humidities were determined experimentally. For these investigations, dry
shoots, separated from sand as far as possible, and brought to constant weight
over calcium chloride, were used. It was found that shoots equilibrated over
calcium chloride usually contained about 5 % of their dry weight of water
which could be removed by standing over concentrated sulphuric acid. The
dry weight obtained over concentrated sulphuric acid was regarded as a
suitable datum; the shoots show further very small losses in weight when
heated for a long period (several days) at 100 C. Under these conditions,
however, the structure of the moss is probably damaged, and some of the
constituents changed, because when re-hydrated and re-equilibrated over
concentrated sulphuric acid the dry weight of the moss is found to be as low as
after heating at 100 C.

(a) Water content at different humidities
The experimental procedure adopted in studying hydration levels of the
shoots involved the use of sulphuric acid of different concentrations to provide atmospheres of a range of constant, known relative humidities. The acid
was held (a layer of ca. 3 cm.) in a glass container with a tightly fitting lid.
A pipe-clay triangle was bent so as to support itself inside the container above
the acid, and was used to hold a watch-glass containing 150-200 mg. of the
moss (previously dried over CaClj). The experiments were conducted in a
temperature-controlled dark-room at 22* 5 C. Relative humidities of 0 %
(over cone. H2SOd, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, 85%, 90% and 95% were
obtained by the use of appropriate mixtures of concentrated sulphuric acid
and water.* A saturated atmosphere (100 % r.h.) was obtained by using water
Fig. 1. The course of water uptake in T. ruraliformis previously dried over calcium
chloride and exposed to atmospheres of different relative humidities. Also shown
is the course of water uptake by shoots of the moss previously dried at 100 C. and
then exposed to a saturated atmosphere.
only. The solutions were allowed to equilibrate thoroughly before the moss
was placed in the containers, and all transfers were done as quickly as possible.
At suitable times the watch-glasses and contents were weighed, and at the end
of the experiment the dry weights of the moss were determined. The least
consistent results were obtained over water; here the occasional formation of
water droplets on the surfaces of the watch-glass and moss led to some irregularities in the weighings.
* Data derived from International Critical Tables, in (National Research Council), and
Handbook of Chemistry and Physics (Chemical Rubber Publishing Co.).
Representative results of this study are shown in Fig. 1 (T. ruraliformis
from Braunton Burrows). The shoots used experimentally still contained some
sand grains, although most were removed; consequently the values shown for
water content of the shoots, especially at high humidities, are somewhat low.
Nevertheless, close agreement was usually found between replicates. It is clear
that at relative humidities between 0 and 95 % equilibration is virtually reached
within 24 hr.; furthermore, with material previously equilibrated over calcium
chloride and then transferred to atmospheres of relative humidities of
20-85 %, the new equilibrium is attained in less than about 10 hr.
Fig. 2. The water content of T. ruraliformis after equilibration at different relative
humidities. The graph includes data from two experiments (shown by the two
types of symbol).
At high relative humidities the water uptake is extensive initially, but the
rate declines progressively although uptake, especially under conditions of
near saturation, is long continued. Increase in weight for a period of up to
10 days has been observed in shoots maintained under 100 % R.H., but over a
long period the results may be sometimes affected by the activities of fungi
and bacteria.
Shoots which have been previously kept at temperatures of 100 C. show
different behaviour. As may be seen in Fig. 1, the initial rate of uptake of
water at 100 % r.h. is much lower than that of shoots which have not been
heated, and the uptake is prolonged. Evidently sufficient destruction is caused
by heating (in this instance for 1 hr. at 100 C.) to have a pronounced effect
on the rate of water uptake and the final equilibrium position. These results
are in substantial agreement with the findings of Mayer & Plantefol (1925 a)
with Hypnum triquetrum {Rhytidiadelphus triquetrw), who observed that the
water-absorbing properties of this moss changed on heating over 100 C, the
shoots being killed. Their results concerning water uptake by normal shoots of
R. triquetrus also accord closely with those given here for Tortula rwaliformis.

Fig. 3. The structure of the leaf of T. ruraliformis. The drawings, made by camera
lucida, show the cells of the mid-rib of the leaf, and the form of the leaf in transverse
section.
The relationship between the amount of water held by T. ruraliformis when
equilibrium has been reached and the relative humidity to which the shoots
are exposed is shown in Fig. 2. The appreciable amount of water held by the
plant at 20 % r.h. (and also against CaCl2) indicates strong imbibing power,
here chemical affinity for water being doubtless at least in part involved.
Relatively little more water is retained at relative humidities up to about 60 %,
but in more humid atmospheres, especially above 85 % r.h,, the amount of
water held is large. At high relative humidities, the cells of the shoots can be
seen to become vacuolated, and it is of note that at 90 % r.h. the leaves of
shoots are showing signs of slight untwisting. At 95 % r.h. the leaves are
moderately unfolded, and at still higher humidities the shoots become fully
expanded.

(b) Mechanism of leaf movement

Reference has already been made to the spiral twisting of the leaves around
the stem when the shoots become dry. Under these conditions the moss has a
dead appearance, the brown highly thickened cells on the abaxial surface of
the mid-rib of the leaves (Fig. 3) being the chief parts exposed. The more
delicate, golden green, papillate cells of the lamina, with its recurved margin
(Fig. 3), are obscured by the tight infolding of the leaves. The hyaline hair
points of the leaves remain exposed, and are especially evident at the tips of
the shoots.
Leaf movements can occur in a few seconds and appear to involve both
imbibition of water by the cell walls, and also changes in turgor of the cells,
probably especially of the large cells on the adaxial surface of the mid-rib
region.
Leaves of dry shoots rapidly unfold when dropped into weak solutions
( < 0*5 M) of sucrose. Within this range, the stronger the solution the longer the
time taken for the leaves to untwist, but there is finally no perceptible difference
in the degree of expansion.
When expanded shoots are transferred to m solutions of sucrose (or sodium
nitrate), however, the leaves fold inwards. The apical tuft of leaves, usually
7-10, inroll moderately tightly in these solutions, which are of plasmolysing
concentration; however, the older leaves further down the stem show relatively little change. Plasmolysis studies indicate that many of the cells of these
old leaves are dead, lacking contents; movements of these leaves must depend
on a hygroscopic mechanism involving imbibition by constituents of the cell
walls rather than turgor phenomena.
IV. Chemical analysis of shoots
Before investigations were undertaken of changes in rates of photosynthesis
under different conditions of the plant, it was useful to know what carbohydrates altered in quantity substantially as a result of photosynthesis, what
were the important chemical constituents of the moss, and what parts of the
shoot were metabolically most active. To gain information on these points,
chemical analyses were carried out on shoots of Tortula ruraliformis collected
from the dunes at Berrow, north Somerset.
The shoots were treated individually, being cut into two portions, the tops
and the bases. The tops included the young green leaves, and the bases the
lower two-thirds of the shoots, bearing brown leaves. About 750 mg. dry
weight of tops and of bases were collected; the sampling was carried out at
about noon on a dry, sunny day (15 May 1952), as much sand as possible
being separated by tapping during the initial sampling.

(a) Extraction procedure

The portions of shoots were dropped into specimen tubes containing absolute alcohol, and on the following day sufficient distilled water was added to
bring the ethanol concentration to 70 %. The temperature was maintained at
37 C. and the tubes shaken periodically. After 6 days the alcohol extract was
drained off, and three further extracts with 70 % ethanol made at 37 C. over
the next 5 days (the temperature was raised to 80 C. for 20 min. during the
last two extracts). Finally the alcohol-extracted material was extracted with
water for 5 hr. at 20 C, and the residue dried and freed from remaining sand.
The alcohol extracts were bulked, filtered, and aliquots dried in vacuo. Then
the solids were weighed, dissolved in water, cleared with aluminium hydroxide
cream, and chemical analyses made.

(b) Analytical methods

Sugars were estimated in the alcohol and in the water extracts both before
and after hydrolysis by the Somogyi procedure (Somogyi, 1945; Willis &
Yemm, 1955). Assays of sugars were also made by the use of the anthrone
reagent (Yemm & Willis, 1954a). The nature of the sugars present was investigated by a chromatographic procedure, and in addition the time course of
colour production with anthrone provided further information concerning the
carbohydrates.
Although tests with iodine for starch in the insoluble residue proved
negative, some attempt was made to estimate insoluble carbohydrate by a
solubilization treatment with 30 % KOH boiled under reflux for 30 min.,
followed by estimations with anthrone.

(c) Results of analyses for carbohydrates

It was found that in many features of the analysis that the bases of the
shoots were similar to the tops, although the tops were richer in almost all of
the components. Some of the data are shown in Table 1, where the results are
expressed on the basis of residual dry weight (the dry wt., at 80 C, of the
shoots after extraction with alcohol and with water).
Table 1. Analyses of tops and bases of shoots o/Tortula ruraliformis
(The tops comprise the apical one-third of the shoots, and the bases the lower
two-thirds. The value for insoluble carbohydrate gives the amount estimated after
solubilization treatment with KOH (see text).

Table 1 indicates that the tops of the shoots are metabolically more active
than the bases, containing more soluble solids, slightly more free reducing
sugars and very much more sucrose. Sucrose is clearly the most important
carbohydrate reserve, although, in view of the analytical procedure used, the
figures for insoluble carbohydrate must be regarded as minimal. In the tops,
sucrose constitutes about three-quarters of the total soluble carbohydrate, but
makes up rather less than this in the bases, where there may be a somewhat
higher proportion of glycosidal material. Some estimate of these glycosides is
provided by the difference between the total carbohydrates as determined by
the Somogyi and anthrone techniques.
The extraction procedure with alcohol is clearly fairly complete in respect of
sugars, little more being extracted by water.
That the chief soluble carbohydrate is sucrose is evident from the Somogyi
estimates, the time course of the anthrone reaction and from the chromatographic separation and identification of the sugars (Yemm & Willis, 1954&).
The latter study indicates the presence of both glucose and fructose, but
analyses involving the use of hypoiodite (van der Plank, 1936) show that most
of the free hexose is glucose.  Keto-hexose derivatives were also detected.
(d) Analyses for other components
No estimates have been made of fats, but some information is available for
nitrogenous constituents and ash components, and may provide some guide
for further investigations.
Soluble nitrogen in the alcohol extracts was determined by a Kjeldahl procedure (Yemm & Willis, 1956), and the insoluble nitrogen of the extracted
residue was estimated by a similar technique. The level of insoluble nitrogen
was, on average, 8 mg./g. residual dry weight and of the soluble nitrogen about
0-5 mg./g. residual dry weight.
In the determination of ash, considerable difficulty was experienced in
obtaining material free from extraneous sand grains. Estimates were made
separately of the ash content of soluble and insoluble components of shoots
collected at Braunton Burrows, north Devon (June 1951). Aliquots of alcohol
extracts of the shoots were evaporated to dryness and then heated to dull
redness in a platinum crucible for about 10 min. The ash components were
found to constitute, on average, 2-35 % of the dry weight of the soluble matter.
The alcohol-extracted residue of the shoots was freed from as much sand as
possible, freshly ignited in a platinum crucible, a known weight transferred to
an asbestos pad on a Gooch crucible and exhaustively eluted with dilute nitric
acid and then with water. The weight of the sand grains remaining in the
residue was finally determined from the weight of the material retained by the
asbestos pad. Estimates of the ash content made in this way gave a value of
6-2 % of the dry weight of the alcohol-insoluble residue of the shoots. From
these determinations it may be calculated that the total ash content of the
unextracted shoots is 5-75 % of the dry weight.
The ash content of another sample of T. ruraliformis (collected on a separate
occasion at Braunton Burrows) was assayed by a different procedure. The
material was washed in a sieve with a jet of water, and then the sand grains
removed with a brush from the shoots which were floated in water in a dish.
Further grains were separated by shaking mechanically in flasks (15 changes of
water). The shoots were then ashed, after drying and weighing, in a platinum
crucible and the ash weighed and sulphated. The powdered sulphated ash was
found still to contain a few sand grains, which were separated in a sieve of
150-mesh (mean diam. of mesh 0-102 mm.). Microscopic examination of the
sulphated ash passing the sieve showed that only a very few small grains of
silica passed. The calculated value for the total ash content of the plant
derived by this procedure was 6-0 %, a figure in substantial agreement with
the previous estimate.
The observed values show that T. ruraliformis contains more ash than many
mosses. In general, figures for the ash content of mosses are about 3 %
(Garjeanne, 1932; Czapefc, 1920), although some mosses contain greater
amounts. However, not infrequently there is doubt concerning the possible
inclusion of extraneous material in the estimations; in many instances where
figures are high, there is an appreciable amount of silica present (Czapek,
1920).
V. Assimilation under natural conditions

(a) Experiment I

An exploratory experiment was carried out on Braunton Burrows on 19 June
1951 to determine the changes in carbohydrate composition of the shoots as a
result of assimilation. For this purpose samples were taken at various times
during the day, and subsequently analysed.
A uniform stand of the moss on a south-west facing dune slope was watered
during the evening of 18 June and darkened by covering with a cloth. The
cloth was removed at 11.30 a.m. on the next morning, and a sample of the
shoots taken into 95 % ethanol. The leaves were at that time mostly expanded,
and the patch was watered at intervals during the dry, sunny day in order to
keep the leaves unrolled. Further samples were taken at 2.40 p.m. and at
6.40 p.m., and an additional sample was collected at 6.15 p.m. from neighbouring dry shoots of the moss, adjoining the watered area. These shoots had
their leaves spirally inrolled for all of the day.
Three successive ethanol extractions of the samples were made over a
period of 4-8 days (the first extraction into ca. 95 % alcohol, and the others
into 70 % alcohol) at 37 C. (ethanol brought to 75-80 C. for a short time).
About 15 g. dry weight ofTortula was extracted by ca. 700 ml. ethanol. After
the alcohol-extracted material had been dried at 80 C, and ground in a mill, a
weighed portion of the powder was extracted with water at 80 C. for 15 min.
Estimations were then made, by the Somogyi procedure, of the free sugars,
unfermentable residues, sucrose (hydrolysed extract) and unfermentable
residues after hydrolysis on the ethanol and also on the water extracts. The
method for the estimation of unfermentable residues (non-sugar reducing substances) involved rapid fermentation by yeast (Yemm, 1935) and assay of the
residual reducing power (Somogyi method).
The chief features of the results are shown in Fig. 4. The free sugars (largely
glucose) were at a moderate level in the sample taken in the morning immediately after darkening overnight, and there was a fairly uniform increase in
hexoses during the day in the shoots kept open by watering. These shoots had
a water content of ca. 180 % of their dry weight as judged by the change in
specific gravity of the ethanol into which sampling was made. The high level of
free hexose found in the sample taken at the end of the experiment was shown
to be largely attributable to an increase of glucose which made up over 85 % of
the total free hexose. The sucrose content of the shoots kept expanded all day
showed no clear trend of change and the small differences found are not likely
to be greater than sampling variations. However, as is evident from Fig. 4, the
total content of free sugars increased progressively. On the other hand, the
shoots which were dry had a very low free hexose content but the sucrose
content was similar to that of the other samples. The levels of non-sugar
reducing substances were similar in all of the samples, constituting ca. 3-4 mg./g.
residual dry wt. (estimated as hexose units), and about half of this material
was ethanol-insoluble. After hydrolysis, the amounts of unfermentable residues were fairly constant and approximately doubled (average value 7-4 mg./g.
residual dry wt.).

Fig. 4. The changes in levels of soluble carbohydrates in shoots of T. ruraliformis
growing in their natural habitat. One sample of the moss was collected from dry
shoots, but the other samples were of shoots which were watered sufficiently to keep
the leaves expanded all day. Details are given in the text (Experiment I).

(b) Experiment II
A more extensive experiment was undertaken in June 1952 on Braunton
Burrows, in the same site as the previous investigation.
A patch of the moss was watered on 15 June and darkened in the evening
with a cloth. Shoots were sampled into absolute ethanol on the following day
at 8.15 a.m. when the cloth was removed from some shoots but left covering
one area. Other samples were collected during the course of the day, and a
further sample gathered from droughted shoots just outside the treated area.
The leaves of these shoots had remained tightly inrolled during the whole of
the warm, sunny day. Additional samples of the darkened shoots were
collected on 18 and 20 June.
Each of the samples was extracted four times by refluxing with 70 % ethanol
over a sand bath, and determinations of carbohydrate content were carried
out by the anthrone procedure.
Some of the results of the analyses are shown in Table 2. The level of total
free sugars in the shoots which were watered and the leaves kept expanded all
day on 16 June increased during the day, whereas, as might be expected, the
level in the shoots which were darkened all day was lower than that of the
initial sample. The shoots which were dry, with leaves inrolled, showed low
values of total free sugars, a finding in agreement with the results of Experiment I. Darkening for a long period led to reduced levels of free sugars,
although little difference was found in the samples taken on 18 and 20 June.
The unfermentable glycosidal compounds estimated by anthrone after treatment of the extracts with yeast did not change very much during the period of
assimilation on 16 June, but decreased progressively in the darkened shoots
and were assayed in only small quantities in the draughted shoots. Comparison with the results of Experiment I shows that the unfermentable residues
estimated by means of anthrone are substantially greater than values obtained
by the Sornogyi method, indicative of the presence of appreciable quantities of
glycosidal compounds.

Table 2.  Changes of carbohydrate content o/Tortula ruraliformis
(A stand of the moss growing in a natural sand-dune habitat was subjected to
various treatments as shown. Estimations, by means of anthrone, are given for
total free sugars and for unfermentable residues, all results being calculated in
terms of glucose and expressed on the basis of the dry weight of the alcoholextracted shoots (residual dry wt.).)


VI.  Photosynthesis and respiration under controlled conditions
The gaseous exchanges of the moss were investigated at different degrees
of hydration under controlled conditions of illumination in a temperaturecontrolled room at 22 C.
The shoots employed were grown as a dense stand (transplanted from sanddunes and allowed to recover before experimentation) in sand in a glass container (11x8x7 cm.) fitted with a glass lid whose greased rubber gasket made
an air-tight seal when the lid was secured by a wooden framework, tightened
by screws. About 350 shoots were usually present in the container, and had a
dry weight of ca. 2 g. The air stream of known carbon dioxide content
(ca. 0-03 %) entered and left the chamber by a distributor system.
Changes in carbon dioxide concentration of the air stream were determined
by the use of an infra-red gas analyser (Grubb Parsons Ltd.); flow rates were
normally 6 l./hr. It was necessary to dry the air stream before it was passed
into the analyser, although it was convenient to arrange that the air which
passed into the plant chamber was moistened because in a stream of completely dry air the leaves soon inroll.
(a)  The effect on gaseous exchange of moistening dry shoots
Shoots of the moss which had been kept fairly dry for several days were used
in some experiments, the leaves being all spirally twisted inwards, appressed to
the stems.
In one such experiment the respiration rate of the moss was first measured,
the plant chamber being kept in complete darkness. It was found to be very
low (ca. 0T8 mg. C02/g. dry wt./hr.) under these conditions. Illumination of
the moss at an intensity of about 500 ft.-candles (photo-flood type lamp) resulted in a measurable rate of photosynthesis, but it amounted to only about a
sixth of the respiratory rate.
The lid of the chamber was then removed and the leaves of the moss
expanded by moistening with a slight spray of distilled water, and measurements quickly resumed. The respiration rate was found to have increased by
about sevenfold (ca. 1-23 mg. COs/g. dry wt./hr.) and the rate of photosynthesis (at 500 ft.-candles) by some 20-fold (ca. 0-66 mg. COa/g. dry wt./hr.).
However, the rate of respiration was still greatly in excess of assimilation.
Doubtless respiration as measured incorporates a contribution from bacteria
and fungi associated with the dead leaves towards the base of the shoots, and
there is a small production of carbon dioxide from micro-organisms in the
sand, but measurements show that this is not a very important consideration
under the conditions used experimentally.
By the next day the respiration rate had declined to a value of about threequarters of that measured soon after the shoots were moistened, and the compensation point was then found to be at a light intensity not very much greater
than 500 ft.-candles.
In this experiment, the leaves were kept expanded for a further 6 days
(except for one short period) and by this time the rate of respiration had fallen
considerably (to ca. 0-38 mg. COa/g. dry wt./hr.), whereas the capacity to
assimilate was not substantially changed. Measurements of carbon dioxide
exchange at a range of intensities indicated that by the end of the experiment
the compensation point of the moss was at a light intensity of the order of
150 ft.-candles. Such a value is, perhaps, not unexpected in view of the high
degree of insolation of the natural habitat of T. ruraliformis.
(b)  The effect of prolonged desiccation on gaseous exchange
It is of interest to know to what extent the drying out of the moss for a
substantial period affects its rate of respiration and powers of assimilation.
To provide information on these points, experiments were carried out with
material which had been kept air-dry for 6 months and then re-hydrated.
Shoots of Tortula collected in June 1951 were air-dried, stored until December
1951, and then placed in a desiccator containing calcium chloride for four
days. The moss was then moistened by a spray, and the individual shoots
orientated upwards, as far as possible, in a nylon gauze contained in a shallow
plant chamber. The respiration rate of the shoots was determined by infra-red
gas analysis and also by a Pettenkofer procedure (Folkes, Willis & Yemm,
1952). Measurements were continued for 10 days and the results are shown in
Fig. 5. The respiration rate rose considerably from its initial value, reaching
its highest level in about 2 days and subsequently declined (after 6 days) to a
value which was lower than that shown initially and was maintained fairly
steadily. Photosynthesis was demonstrable (by infra-red gas analysis) on the
first day of the experiment, but at 300 ft.-candles the rate was only about onetenth of that of respiration; doubtless changes occur in the plastids when the
leaves are droughted for a considerable time. The photosynthetic rate had
increased slightly by the third day, but was still less than one-tenth of the now
enhanced respiration rate. The shoots were illuminated for only short periods
and no further measurements were made of rates of photosynthesis in order
not to affect appreciably the trend of respiratory behaviour.


Fig. 5. The course of the respiration rate of T. ruraliformis previously subjected to
severe desiccation. Measurements by infra-red gas analysis were started on
5 December 1951 (day 0), very soon after the shoots had been moistened; after
day 3 the measurements were made mostly by the Pettenkofer procedure.
VII. The xerophytic nature of Tor tula ruraliformis
The survival and success of Tortula in habitats sometimes subjected to severe
drought and insolation are clearly related to special features of the structure of
the plant and to its physiology.
The importance of leaf movements (and xipward growth) with regard to
escape from burial by sand have already been mentioned. These movements
are also significant in that photosynthesis is very highly reduced when the
leaves are infolded, and under these conditions the plastids are doubtless
protected against damage from intense insolation. Leaves artificially kept
expanded by spraying in a greenhouse on hot, sunny days have been seen to
become yellowed, possibly because of changes in the plastids; studies of the
plastids by electron microscopy are now in progress.
The poikilohydrous nature of the moss which has been demonstrated isparalleled in a number of bryophytes. Indications have also been gained that
T. ruraliformis contains appreciable quantities of hydrophilic compounds.
Calorimetric studies of the hydration of mosses by Mayer, Plantefol &
Wurmser (1925) show, from the thermal changes observed, that imbibition
phenomena are involved; however, at high water contents vacuolation is, in
addition, of importance.
Measurements of osmotic pressure of the cells of the leaves were found,
from plasmolysis investigations, to give values which were considerable (up to
about 17 atmospheres). In this connexion the high level of sucrose often
present is of note.
The carbohydrate content found, the sugars often constituting 5-8 % of the
dry weight of the plant, is in agreement with recorded values for other bryophytes, and may be compared with levels of soluble carbohydrates of ca. 6 %
in Sphagnum palustre, ca. 5-5 % in Marchantia polymorpha and over 7 % in
Metzgeriafurcata (see Hegnauer, 1962). Clearly Tortula ruraliformis falls into
the saccharophyll group of bryophytes recognized by Rancken (1914), in
which starch is either absent or present in only small quantity. Typically this
group contains xerophytes of lithophytic and epiphytic habit (e.g. Andreaeaceae, Grimmiaceae, Orthotrichaceae), whereas the contrasted mesophile and
hygrophile mosses are usually rich in starch. Rancken (1914) records that the
vegetative organs of T. ruralis, a close ally of T. ruraliformis, are entirely starchfree, as had been earlier observed (Marchal, 1906). In the present study on
T, ruraliformis tests with iodine for starch also proved negative, sucrose being
shown to be the carbohydrate of greatest importance in this plant.
Studies on the carbon assimilation of the moss indicate that under favourable conditions the level of carbohydrate in the shoots may increase quite
substantially over the course of one day. Of considerable importance to the
plant's survival is its capacity to photosynthesize actively as soon as the leaves
expand after a period of desiccation (provided that this period is not excessively prolonged). In dry weather in summer, it seems probable that the plant
is able to take advantage of early morning dew, which is frequently sufficient
to lead to leaf expansion, the shoots photosynthesizing at an appreciable rate
for a few hours before the water content falls sufficiently for inrolling of the
leaves to occur.
The great desiccation resistance of T. ruraliformis is indicated by its ability
to remain alive in an air-dry condition for very considerable periods; plants of
Tortula have been reported (Garjeanne, 1932) to regenerate protonemata after
14 years, When dry, the respiration rate falls to a low value, as found in other
bryophytes, e.g. the observations of Mayer & Plantefol (19256) on Rhytidiadelphus triquetrus. An interesting feature is the observed respiratory behaviour of
shoots of Tortula on re-hydration. When the draughting is not severe, it has
been shown that the respiration rate is high initially on moistening and subsequently declines. After a long period of desiccation, however, the behaviour
is different, respiration rate rising to a peak after some 2 days. These observations parallel to some extent the distinctive respiratory behaviour of Conocephalum conicum of low water content recorded by Ensgraber (1954) and of
the drought-resistant fern Ceterach officinarum more recently reported on by
Oppenheimer & Halevy (1962).

It seems possible that an enhanced respiration rate is a general feature of
plants which have been subjected to considerable desiccation (Stiles, I960), the
amount of stimulation depending on the duration and intensity of the desiccation. Oppenheimer & Halevy (1962) suggest that the respiratory peak, following plasmatic imbibition and rearrangement in the cells, may depend on greater
availability of respiratory enzymes or be connected with early senescence. It
seems likely that regulation of cellular respiration is at first markedly disturbed
by the re-hydration of the cells.


VIII. Summary
1.   Tortula ruratiformis is a xerophyte whose structural and physiological
features suit it to an environment subject to considerable desiccation and sand movement.
2.   Untwisting and expansion of the leaves depend on hygroscopic movements but turgor phenomena may also be concerned.
3.   The moss is poikilohydrous, its water content quickly equilibrating with
the environment. The leaves unfold at relative humidities greater than 90 %.
4.   The tops of the shoots are physiologically the most active. Analyses of
the chief constituents (carbohydrates, nitrogen compounds, ash) have beenmade.
5.   Sucrose is the most important photosynthetic product, making up
usually 5 % or more of the dry weight of the plant. Starch is absent from the
leaves, and most of the hexose is glucose.
6.   Photosynthesis virtually ceases when the leaves are tightly rolled inwards round the stem.
7.   On re-hydration of moderately droughted shoots, the respiration rate
rises quickly from a very low value, and the tissues can photosynthesize immediately.
8.   After very prolonged desiccation, photosynthetic power is impaired,
and the respiration rises to a peak rate some appreciable time after rehydration and then declines.


