BRAUNTON BURROWS: THE EFFECTS ON THE VEGETATION OF THE ADDITION OF MINERAL NUTRIENTS TO THE DUNESOILS
By A. J. WILLIS
Department of Botany, University of Bristol

INTRODUCTION
In earlier publications of this series (Willis, Folkes, Hope-Simpson & Yemm 1959a; Willis & Yemm 1961) it was shown that the vegetation of the dune system of Braunton Burrows, N. Devon, may be severely limited by the supply of mineral nutrients. The results of turf transplant cultures and the growth of tomato as an indicator plant in the sand suggested that the major nutrients, nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium, were
the chief deficiencies, minor minerals being present in adequate amounts.
A second approach is to add nutrients, in various combinations, to the soils of the
Burrows and to determine the effects of these additions on the growth and floristic
composition of the vegetation. Thus the influence of other factors operating in the
natural habitat may be Assessed and some of their interactions with the supply of soil
nutrients revealed. From this standpoint it was of particular interest to investigate the
effects of treatment with mineral nutrients on the wide range of communities represented
in the dune system (Willis, Folkes, Hope-Simpson & Yemm 1959b); contrasting sharply,
for example, is the vegetation of the dune slacks and that of the dry dunes, both in
respect of the dominant plants and associated species.
The purpose of the present paper is chiefly to report the effects on various types of
vegetation of the dunes and the slacks of the addition of mineral nutrients in the field.
The studies were coupled with those carried out under controlled conditions in a glasshouse on turf transplants, most of the results of which have already been given (Willis
& Yemm 1961); however, some further results of investigation of the effect of various
mineral nutrients on transplants from the slacks are included here. In the Burrows
themselves the effects of a variety of combinations of nutrients were most fully explored
with reference to the vegetation of the slacks. Successive applications of the nutrient
salts were made in selected experimental sites, and the components of the vegetation
assessed on a number of occasions over a period of 2 years. In this way information
could be gained of the nature and rate of changes in the composition of the vegetation
and a comparison could be made with the changes observed in the turf transplants,
in which different nutrient treatments were found to favour different species to different
extents, resulting in marked changes in their proportions.
In this series of investigations it was hoped, by the different approaches, to elucidate
fairly fully the importance of the levels of the various mineral nutrients in controlling
the vigour, distribution and relative abundance of the plants of the dune system.

EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
(1) Field experiments
The effects on the vegetation of the addition of mineral nutrients were studied in six
sites, chosen to represent the chief communities of the Burrows. These areas were as
follows: a low 'fixed' dune, bearing dry dune pasture type vegetation containing relict
Ammophila armaria; typical dry dune pasture (containing Festuca rubra with abundant
Thymus drucei and Camptothecium lutescens); lichen-type dry dune pasture; a belt
ranging from dry dune pasture to slack vegetation; and two samples of slack vegetation.
In each site care was taken to select, by subjective judgment, a plot of sufficient size in
which the vegetation was as nearly as possible uniform, and the surface of the ground
fairly level. (Mineral nutrients were also added to pure marram on a high dune but the
results of the study on marram will, however, be presented in a subsequent paper.)
In all, the experiments covered the period from June 1957 to June 1961, the individual
experiments being run for 2 years. During the whole of this period there was no evidence
of the existence on the Burrows of appreciable numbers of rabbits, and there was very
little indication that rabbit-grazing had any significant effect on the results. It may be
noted, however, that previous attempts (in 1948-49) to conduct investigations on the
effects of mineral nutrients on the vegetation had to be abandoned because it was found
impossible to fence off areas of the Burrows effectively from the very abundant rabbit
population.
(a) Lay-out of the experiments
In each site, replicate treatments with mineral nutrients were given, for most of the
experimental plots the lay-out being based on a Latin Square.
For three of the areas (dry dune pasture with marram, typical dry dune pasture and
lichen-type pasture) the effects of the treatment with a mixture of salts containing the
major nutrients, and of a similar mixture but with trace elements in addition, were
assessed by means of a 3x3 Latin Square. Plots of 11x11 ft (3-35x3-35 m), selected
for uniformity of the vegetation, were gridded so as to give three rows and three columns,
each of the nine units so formed being 3x3 ft (91-4x91-4 cm); between the rows and
columns were strips 1 ft (30-5 cm) wide which were used for access and which reduced
the possibility of spread of nutrients from one small square to another. For reference,
the corners of these small squares were permanently marked; wooden labels inserted
flush with the sand surface were found to be satisfactory for this. In each row and column
of the Latin Square there was one control area, to which no nutrients were added, one
area which received major nutrients only and one area to which were added both major
and minor nutrients. In the site in which relict marram was present, it was thought
appropriate, in view of the extensive rhizome system of the plant, to increase the size
of the Latin Square to 12-5x 12-5 ft (3-81 x 3-81 m), the small squares being of 3-5 ft
(1-07 m) side.
In one of the sites of the slack vegetation a very simple experimental lay-out involving
only four small squares was adopted, and the comparison was confined to that between
the control vegetation (no treatment) and the vegetation receiving complete nutrients.
The small squares were of 4-5 ft (1-37 m) side, and the access strips here 3 ft (91-4 cm)
wide, because of the possibility of lateral movement of nutrients in this damp
habitat.

In the second site where the vegetation of the slacks was studied, a level area of 31
xll ft (9-45x3-35 m) was selected, and gridded to give twenty-four squares of 3 ft
(91-4 cm) side, so as to allow a three-fold replication of seven treatments with mineral
nutrients and also controls.
The belt of vegetation investigated was 30 ft (9-14 m) long and 1-5 ft (45-7 cm) wide;
for convenience in the addition of salts and for assessing the vegetation the transect
was treated as a series of units 3 ft (91-4 cm) long. A mixture of complete nutrients was
added to the whole of the belt, and an adjoining belt of vegetation served as a control.
(b) Treatment with mineral nutrients
The mineral salts were applied to the experimental plots on three occasions during
the year, usually in mid-June, October, and late April. All the experiments were started
in June; as each ran for 2 years, the areas received altogether six applications of salts.
The salts were crushed, thoroughly mixed, and spread by hand in powder form as
evenly as possible over the appropriate areas.
Table 1. The composition of the mixtures of salts
The figures represent the weight in grammes for treatment of 1 of vegetation.


The amounts of salts added were based, in general, on the levels often used in agricultural practice for correcting deficiencies of nutrients in the soil. As three applications
of salts were made each year, the quantities of nutrients added were substantial. The
composition of the mixtures of salts applied is shown in Table 1; analytical grade
chemicals were used throughout the present study. In most of the experimental areas
the effects of a combination of all the major and minor nutrients listed were studied,
and in some of the areas the effects of a mixture of the major nutrients only were also
investigated. No additions of calcium were made, as this is present in abundance in
the sandy soils (Willis et al. 1959a).

Table 2. The composition of the various mixtures of mineral salts used in the
experiment on slack vegetation

The figures represent quantities (grammes) added per square yard for the seven treatments.
A more detailed investigation was carried out on the vegetation of one of the slacks;
the effects of the addition of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium were studied alone
and in various combinations. Details of the salt mixtures are given in Table 2. In order
to avoid possible unfavourable effects of the addition of single salts, some degree of
ionic balance was obtained by the use of magnesium sulphate. No additions of any of
the minor nutrients were made in this experiment.
(c) Assessments of the vegetation
The vegetation of the experimental sites was scored subjectively by the methods
described by Willis et al. (1959a) and by Willis & Yemm (1961). As the areas in which
the vegetation was assessed were usually 1 yd2 (0-84 m2) or larger, in the estimation of
the relative contribution of the various species to the total bulk of the vegetation it was
in some instances appropriate to count more than ten 'traces' as the equivalent of one
unit, because some plants were present in only the most minute quantities.
In order to obtain evidence of rates of change of the vegetation, complete assessments
were made at the start of each experiment, at the end of the first year, and when the
experiments were terminated after treatment for 2 years. In addition, scores of all the
major components were made in April and in October. As well as the scores of relative
bulk at these times, the average height of the vegetation was estimated.
At the end of the experiments the vegetation was cut off at ground level, and separated
into the various components which were weighed to provide an objective assessment.
Usually the vegetation was cut from the central 2x2 ft (61 x61 cm) of the small squares
in order to avoid any edge effect. The vegetation was sorted, immediately after cutting,
into the chief species which were collected in a series of polythene bags; plants present
as 'traces' only were all bulked together (referred to as 'remainder'). The bags were
weighed, as soon as sorting was complete, by means of a spring balance, protected
from wind, on the site. In this way a record was obtained of the fresh weights of the
total vegetation and of its major components. For convenience of comparison with the
subjective estimates, the weights for each species (and the 'remainder') were converted
into the appropriate mark equivalent out of a total of 10, an allowance being made for
bare ground. It must be realised, however, that the subjective scores refer to the complete
small squares, and the estimates based on weight to only the central portions of these
squares. Nevertheless, edge effects were usually fairly small, and in the considerable
number of checks which were made in the course of the present investigations the
agreement between the two sets of results proved to be very close. There was, however,
some tendency to underestimate, by the subjective method, small trailing plants such as
Anagallis tenella, and also bryophytes and lichens when these form a thick mat.

(2) Transplant experiment
The experimental procedure was the same as that adopted in previous investigations,
a full account of which has already been given (Willis & Yemm 1961).
Ten round turves, selected for similarity of their vegetation, were collected on 12
April 1960 from a large slack between the dunes (c/. site S5, Table 9, Willis et al. 1959b),
and transferred to the greenhouse. The transplant cultures were treated with deionized
water, as necessary, until 4 May; subsequently additions of mineral nutrient solutions
were made. Two transplants were treated with a complete mineral nutrient solution,
two with a solution lacking nitrogen, two with a solution lacking phosphorus, two with
a solution lacking potassium and two with a solution lacking nitrogen, phosphorus
and potassium.
The composition of the solutions is as detailed by Willis & Yemm (1961, pp. 378-9),
except that the nutrient solution lacking nitrogen contained, in addition to the salts
listed, 8-76gCaCl2.6H2O/10 1., and the solution lacking potassium contained in addition
1 -70 g NaNO3/101. The solution lacking nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium contained
1 -17 g NaCl, 4-38 g CaCl2.6H20 and 1 -84 g MgS04.7H20 per 10 1. as well as the usual
supply of minor nutrients. Normally the transplant cultures were given 200 ml of culture
solution and 200 ml of deionized water on alternate days.
The vegetation was assessed initially on 30 April, again on 21 July and finally on
8 December 1960 when all of the plants were cut off at the sand surface and the fresh
weights determined.

Table 3. The composition of the vegetation of lichen-type pasture initially and after treatment with mineral nutrients
Assessments of the vegetation are given for the nine units of the Latin Square as follows: /, at the start of the experiment (19 June 1958); 2S, subjective scores
made finally (20 June 1960), and 2W, scores based on the fresh weight of the shoot systems at the end of the experiment. The chief components of the vegetation
are listed first; 'other' species, details of which are not given, occurring as traces (T) only in not more than three of the units, are Aphanes arvensis, Cerastium
semidecandrum, Cynoglossum officinale, Desmazeria rigida, Echium vulgare, Erigeron acris, Geranium molle, Phleum arenarium, Sonchus asper, S. oleraceus, Veronica
arvensis, Viola riviniana, Barbula cylindrica, B.fallax and Nostoc sp. The treatments were: A, major nutrients only; B, major and minor nutrients. C are control
areas (no addition of nutrients).

EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS AND RESULTS
(1) The effects on the vegetation of the addition of nutrients in natural habitats
The addition of mineral nutrients to the vegetation of various parts of the Burrows
resulted in a pronounced increase in height and fresh weight of the plants. Especially
well marked were the changes in the floristic composition of the vegetation, treatment
with nutrients leading to greater abundance, in the dry dune pasture sites, of Festuca
rubra and Poapratensis ssp. subcaerulea and a corresponding loss of mosses and lichens;
in the wetter areas Agrostis stolonifera often became a clear dominant.
The increase in fresh weight of the vegetation resulting from the addition of nutrients
has been shown to be statistically significant, but the differences in respect of yield between
the effects of major nutrients and of a combination of major and minor nutrients are
small and do not reach the level of statistical significance (it may be noted, however,
that the yields resulting from major plus minor nutrients are consistently somewhat
greater than those of vegetation receiving only major nutrients). Further, the inclusion
of minor with the major nutrients did not lead to any detectable differences in the
composition of the vegetation.
A fairly full set of results is presented for one site (lichen-type pasture), but for the
other sites treated similarly the data are, for simplicity, given in less detail, the vegetation
records for the areas receiving major and major plus minor nutrients being averaged
together in view of the close agreement of the findings.

(a) Lichen-type pasture
The area studied was of stable low dune in the inland region of the system, near to
and having vegetation somewhat similar to that of site D15, shown in Table 7 of Willis
et al. (1959b). The composition of the vegetation before and after treatment with mineral
nutrients is listed in Table 3, in which details are given of each unit of the Latin Square.
It may be seen from Table 3 that initially the vegetation was of a uniform nature,
and that lichens dominated; especially abundant was Cladonia rangiformis, among
which grew small amounts of C. furcata; Peltigera canina was also plentiful. Mosses,
particularly Hypnum cupressiforme, were frequent, and together with lichens made up
nearly 65% of the vegetation, which reached only 1 -5 cm in height. Festuca rubra and
Poa pratensis ssp. subcaerulea, although present throughout, were distributed very
sparsely.
No clear trends of change were detected over the 2 year period in the control areas,
but in the treated areas the vegetation showed many differences during this time. The
lichens and mosses, notably Cladonia rangiformis and Hypnum cupressiforme, were
much reduced in importance, some forms being eliminated. On the other hand, Festuca
rubra and Poa pratensis ssp. subcaerulea were considerably favoured, and together
made up about half of the vegetation at the end of the experiment. These changes were
common to the areas treated with major nutrients and with major plus minor nutrients;
the similarity of the effects of these treatments, both in respect of the nature of the changes
and their magnitude may be seen in Table 3 by comparison of the records for the A
(major nutrients only) and B (major and minor nutrients) squares. Also shown in
Table 3 are the much greater height and yield (fresh weight) of the vegetation in the
treated areas. The more complete cover and the reduction in numbers of species here
may well be attributed to the luxuriant growth, chiefly of the grasses, and to a lesser
extent of Sedum acre. Adversely affected by this competition, sometimes to the point of
Table 4. The rate of change of composition of the vegetation of lichen-type pasture resulting from treatment with mineral nutrients
Average figures, based on three units of the Latin Square, are given of the subjective estimates of the chief components of the vegetation for seven occasions as
follows: a, 19 June 1958; b, 26 Oct. 1958; c, 22 April 1959; d, 18 June 1959; e, 24Oct. 1959;/, 12-April 1960; g, 20 June 1960. A, B and C are as listed in Table 3.

Table 5. The effect of the addition of mineral nutrients on the vegetation of lichen-type pasture
Average scores for the main constituents of the vegetation of the control and treated areas are shown for the seven occasions, a-g, listed in Table 4. The figures
for the control areas are based on three units of the Latin Square, and for the treated areas on six units, three of which received major nutrients only and three
both major and minor nutrients. The estimates obtained from the fresh weights of the components of the vegetation are also given (gm), as well as the final subjective assessments (gs). At the foot of the table is shown the average fresh weight yield/unit of the Latin Square.
extinction, were Hypochaeris glabra, Cladonia pyxidata, Collema and Leptogium spp.,
Diploschistes scruposus, Placodium fulgens, Tortula ruraliformis and Trichostomum spp.
Assessments of the vegetation made at various occasions during the 2 year period
provide information on the rate at which the composition of the vegetation changed.
The results are given for the main species in Table 4, from which it is evident that only
minor fluctuations were observed in the control areas. It can also be seen that substantial
changes occurred in the vegetation of the treated plots and that these changes were
very similar for the A and B treatments, the records only rarely differing by more than
J mark. The first application of mineral nutrients resulted in distinctive differences
between the vegetation of the treated and control areas. Records made 4 months after
the initial treatment show that the average height of the vegetation receiving nutrients
was much greater than that of the control, and that the contribution of Festuca rubra
and Poa pratensis ssp. subcaerulea to the relative bulk was increased whereas that of the
lichens was smaller. With subsequent additions of nutrients these changes became
more marked, the grasses ultimately dominating. There is an indication that Crepis
capillaris was favoured by the treatment at first, but later, like Leontodon leysseri,
persisted only in trace quantities, probably because of suppression largely by the grasses.
The major effects of the addition of nutrients are summarized in Table 5, where the
contrast between the control and treated areas is readily seen. The vegetation of the control areas remained fairly constant, showing only little seasonal variation in height or
composition of the chief plants; it may be noted that the assessment by weight accorded
closely with the subjective scores of relative bulk, lichens and mosses making up about
two-thirds of the weight of4he total vegetation. Table 5 also indicates clearly, as already
noted, that in the treated areas the increase of Festuca and the somewhat slower increase
of Poa was associated with a decrease of lichens and mosses; Carex arenaria was
apparently only little affected by the nutrients. The number of species showed a progressive decline, in contrast to the steady number in the control areas, but the total weight
of the treated vegetation at the end of the experiment was about twice that of the control.
An analysis of variance showed that this difference is significant at approximately the
5% level, but that there were no significant differences due to row or column effects in
the Latin Square, nor any significant effect of the inclusion of minor nutrients with the
major.
It may be seen from Table 5 that the vegetation was shorter in the second year (June
1960) than in the first year (June 1959) after treatment, in spite of continued application
of nutrients. This difference is probably a reflection of the drier conditions on the
Burrows in the early summer of 1960 (rainfall at Chivenor March-June, 6-16 in.) as
compared with 1959 (rainfall March-June, 7-82 in.), the vegetation being limited by
lack of moisture; some of the plants in the treated area were in a partially wilted condition during mid June 1960.

(b) Typical dry dune pasture
The site investigated was a fairly stable low dune (30-5 ft O.D.) just landward of the
main ridge, and initially bore a closed mossy turf containing plentiful Camptothecium
lutescens, Hypnum cupressiforme, Peltigera canina, Thymus drucei and Carex arenaria
together with somewhat smaller amounts of Festuca rubra.
The chief effects of the application of mineral nutrients are shown in Table 6. No
substantial changes were observed in the control areas throughout the period of the
experiment (June 1957 to June 1959), but in the treated areas differences soon became
evident; by October 1957 enhanced growth was shown by Festuca rubra, Car ex arenaria,
Erodium cicutarium, Galium verum, Plantago coronopus, Sedum acre and Viola spp.
The continued increase of Festuca rubra, and to a smaller extent of Sedum acre, was
accompanied by a reduction in mosses and lichens, and by June 1958 these cryptogams
were of subsidiary importance whereas Festuca and Poa pratensis ssp. subcaerulea
made up half of the vegetation. The rise of the grasses was associated with a decrease of
Thymus drucei, as well as of some of the plants which were earlier favoured by the
nutrients.

Table 6. The effect of mineral nutrients on the vegetation of dry dune pasture
The table is constructed in a similar manner to Table 5, average scores for the main components of
the vegetation being shown for four occasions: a, 15 April 1958, b, 15 June 1958, c, 22 April 1959,
ds and dm, 15 June 1959, subjective assessments and estimates based on fresh weight. 'Other' species are:
Aira praecox, Anagallis arvensis, Arenaria serpyllifolia, Cerastium semidecandrum, C. tetrandrum,
Cladonia rangiformis, Desmazeria rigida, Erigeron acris, Erodium cicutarium, Euphorbia portlandica,
Galium verum, Geranium molle, Hypochaeris glabra, Phleum arenarium, Plantago coronopus, Senecio
jacobaea, Sonchus oleraceus, Taraxacum laevigatum, Tortula ruraliformis, Veronica arvensis, Viola canina, V. riviniana.


Ultimately the treated areas were very strongly dominated by a thick, tall growth of
Festuca rubra which contrasted sharply with the low mossy vegetation of the control
areas. The number of species surviving amongst the thick Festuca was small; eliminated
or much reduced in occurrence were Aira praecox, Arenaria serpyllifolia, Cerastium spp.,
Desmazeria rigida, Erodium cicutarium, Euphorbia portlandica, Geranium molle, Hypochaeris glabra, Phleum arenarium and Veronica arvensis. The fresh weight of the vegetation of the treated areas was nearly twjce that of the untreated, this difference being
statistically significant at approximately the 1 % level.

(c) Dry dune pasture with relict marram
The vegetation of this site differed chiefly from that of the previous area in containing
fairly sparse marram of low vigour, rather less Carex arenaria and Festuca rubra, no
Poa pratensis ssp. subcaerulea, but more Tortula ruraliformis. There was also more bare
sand than in the adjoining typical dry dune pasture already described.
The most pronounced effects of the treatment with mineral nutrients are shown in

Fig. 1. Whereas there were no substantial changes in the vegetation of the control areas,
in the treated parts there was a marked progressive increase of Festuca rubra, and a
pronounced decline of mosses (chiefly Tortula ruraliformis, Camptotecium lutescens and
Hypnum cupressiforme) and of Thymus drucei, although the latter was more vigorous
and flowered more freely in the treated areas in October 1957 (first application of
nutrients was in June 1957) than in the controls. Also temporarily favoured by the
nutrients, before the Festuca assumed complete dominance, were Arenaria serpyllifolia,
Phleum arenarium, Cardamine hirsuta, Senecio jacobaea and Viola riviniana. The addition
of nutrients led to increased growth and vigour of Ammophila arenaria; the results
show that greater numbers of shoots were produced of greater average height and of
greater fresh weight than those of plants in the control areas. However, because of the
much enhanced growth of Festuca, the relative contribution of Ammophila to the total
bulk of the vegetation declined slightly.

Fig. 1. The chief changes in the vegetation of dry dune pasture resulting from the application
of mineral nutrients. The results, given for five successive occasions, are shown in histogram
form and are based on the average assessments of the six treated areas of the Latin Square.
After a period of 2 years Festuca dominated the treated areas, there was only very
little bare sand, and the number of species occurring was reduced to nearly a half of
those initially present. The average height of the vegetation was finally about 35 cm
(see Fig. 1) as compared with c. 2 cm in the control, and the fresh weight of the vegetation
was nearly three times that of the control.

(d) Belt transect
The belt, situated inland of the main dunes, passed from dry dune pasture into a
damp hollow. Strongly contrasting types of vegetation were consequently included
within a short distance of one another.
The chief points of interest are illustrated in Fig. 2. Although the eastern end (0 ft)
of the transect was less than 3 ft (0-91 m) higher than the western end (30 ft, 9-14 m),
it can be seen from Fig. 2 that there was a marked gradation of vegetation; this is
largely attributable to the influence of the water table (Willis et al. 1959b). Initially,
at the higher end, mosses and Thymus drucei were the most important components
of the vegetation, in the lower areas Agrostis stolonifera, Anagallis tenella, Bryum
pseudotriquetrum, Hydrocotyle vulgaris and Leontodon leysseri were plentiful, and in
the intermediate zone Festuca rubra and Juncus acutus were abundant; almost everywhere there was a complete cover of vegetation with very little bare sand.

Fig. 2. The changes in the vegetation of a belt transect brought about by the application of mineral
nutrients. On the left is shown the vegetation initially (June 1958) and on the right after treatment for
2 years (June 1960). The initial results are based on subjective scores of relative bulk and the final ones
on both the fresh weights of the plants and the subjective estimates (which were in close agreement).
Only the most important components of the vegetation are shown. The areas harvested for weight
determinations were 3 x 1 ft (91 x 30 cm). All of the results apply to the treated transect, except for the
weights of total vegetation shown on the left of the figure; the values given here were obtained in June
1960 from the control strip of vegetation which was parallel to the treated strip and about a metre away.
The profile is shown at the bottom of the figure (water level in mid-June 1960 was 28-2 ft O.D.).
Treatment with complete nutrients led to the overwhelming dominance of Festuca
rubra in the higher parts of the transect, and of Agrostis stolonifera in the lower areas
(see Fig. 2). Poet pratensis ssp. subcaerulea also showed a substantial increase in the
higher parts, but was somewhat reduced where in competition with very thick Agrostis.
Holcus lancttus was scanty initially but became more widespread and plentiful as a result
of the treatment. All these grasses flowered freely in the treated areas, but poorly or
not at all outside the transect.
The dense growth of Festuca rubra on the higher ground led to the reduction or
elimination of mosses, such as Tortula ruraliformis, Camptothecium lutescens, Bryum
pendulum, Hypnum cupressiforme and Trichostomum flavovirens; lichens, e.g. Peltigera
canina; Thymus drucei; and small annuals such as Aira praecox and Desmazeria rigida.
In the wetter areas there was a decline or complete loss of Anagallis tenella, Bellis
perennis, Bryum pseudotriquetrum, Epipactis palustris, Hydrocotyle vulgaris, Lotus
corniculatus and Prunella vulgaris, but Carexflacca showed an increase, producing tall
shoots in the thick Agrostis stolonifera. The mineral nutrients appeared to have little
effect, however, on Carex arenaria or on Juncus acutus. As found elsewhere on the
Burrows, and as shown in Fig. 2, treatment with nutrients resulted in few species occurring, much greater height of the vegetation and approximately a doubling of its weight.

Table 7. The effect of complete mineral nutrients on the vegetation of a dune slack
The assessments of the chief components of the vegetation are given for three occasions: a, 20 June
1958; b, 18 June 1959; c, 24 June 1960. The results are the averages for two control and two treated
areas, and for the last occasion are based on the mean of the subjective scores and fresh weight determinations. The figures for total fresh weight refer to an area of 2 x 2 ft (61 x 61 cm). 'Other' species
include: Blackstonia perfoliata, Carex serotina, Cirsium arvense, C. dissectum, Epipactis palustris,
Euphrasia confusa, Glaux maritima, Juncus acutus, J. articulatus, Mentha aquatica, Plantago coronopus,
Prunella vulgaris, Sagina nodosa, Sonchus arvensis, Taraxacum laevigatum, Bryum pseudotriquetrum,
Campylium polygamum, Leiocolea badensis, Lophocolea bidentata, Moerckia flotoviana, Nostoc sp. and
Preissia quadrata.


(e) The vegetation of dune slacks
Investigations were made in two parts of a large interdunal slack near the south end
of the Burrows; in one area the effect of complete nutrients was studied, but in the
other a more extensive investigation of different nutrient treatments was undertaken.
In the first of these areas the natural vegetation was open and very short, as shown
in Table 7, which gives the main features of the vegetation initially, and after treatment
with complete nutrients. There was little change in the control plots during the 2 years
of the study, the most important species being Carex flacca, Anagallis tenella, Hydrocotyle vulgaris and rosette plants such as Bellis perennis and Leontodon leysseri. Liverworts, notably Leiocolea badensis, Lophocolea bidentata, Preissia quadrata and Riccardia
jpinguis, and mosses such as Bryum pseudotriquetrum and Campylium polygonum,
although making up only a small proportion of the total bulk of the vegetation, were
widespread and fairly plentiful.
Treatment with nutrients resulted in the development of much taller and thicker
vegetation, all the bare sand being quickly covered. Agrostis stolonifera became a
clear dominant, although Poa pratensis ssp. subcaerulea also increased substantially.
In addition, Pulicaria dysenterica and Trifolium repens were favoured by the treatment.
The bryophytes were considerably reduced; for example, Leiocolea badensis and
Lophocolea bidentata, which in some seasons together formed a mat covering about
10% of the area of the control plots, were completely eliminated. Many of the lowgrowing dicotyledons were also reduced, especially Anagallis tenella, Bellis perennis,
Leontodon leysseri and Plantago coronopus. The relative importance of some plants
was, however, not much altered: among these were Carex arenaria, Glaux maritima,
Hydrocotyle vulgaris and Juncus articulatus. After 2 years the vegetation of the treated
areas was not only about fifteen times the height of the untreated vegetation, but was
more than seven times its fresh weight (see Table 7).
The second area studied was close to the first and supported similar vegetation, but
was wetter, the water table being generally about 2 in. (6 cm) nearer to the sand surface
here than in the first site, and the vegetation subject to flooding during wet seasons
(the water table in June 1961 was 11 in. (28 cm) below the surface).
The effects of seven mineral nutrient treatments on the vegetation are shown in
Table 8, together with the assessments of the vegetation made in the control (untreated)
areas. It may be seen that the initial composition of the vegetation resembled, in all its
chief features, that already described; no clear trends of change were detected in the
vegetation of the untreated squares. Where complete nutrients were added, however,
extensive changes were soon noticeable; after 2 years the sand surface was almost
completely covered by the vegetation, Agrostis stolonifera had become dominant, Poa
pratensis ssp. subcaerulea had increased, but Anagallis tenella was much reduced and
some bryophytes eliminated. The low-growing dicotyledons were not, however, quite
so adversely affected as in the previous site, probably because of the rather less tall and
less dense growth of the Agrostis here (cf. Tables 7 and 8). The fresh weight of the
vegetation was, nevertheless, finally more than three times that of the control areas.
In the squares where all the major nutrients, with the exception of nitrogen, were
added, the vegetation remained short and sparse, although the amount of bare sand
was somewhat reduced, and the fresh weight of the vegetation finally was about 25%
greater than that of the control areas. The chief change in the vegetation was an increase
in Agrostis stolonifera, but this was a much smaller increase than in the areas receiving
complete nutrients. Most of the other plants were not affected to any marked extent
and the number of species was maintained at a steady value. Somewhat similar results
were found in the squares to which only phosphate was added, although here the increase
of Agrostis was smaller still, and the fresh weight of the total vegetation very similar to
that of the control.
Distinctive changes resulted when nutrients complete except for phosphate were
added to the vegetation. Growth was promoted to some extent, the plants being taller
Table 8. The effect of different combinations of mineral nutrients on the vegetation of a dune slack
Scores for the relative bulk of the most important species are given for three occasions: a, 19 June 1959; b, 24 June 1960; c, 19-23 June 1961. The final assessments are based on both the subjective scores and the fresh weight determinations, and the figures for total fresh weights refer to an area of 2 x 2 ft (61 x 61
cm). All of the results are the means for three replicate squares. Details of the composition of the various mixtures of mineral salts are given in Table 2. 'Other'
species include: Anagallis arvensis, Cirsium arvense, Epilobium lanceolatum, E. parviflorum, Epipactispalustris, Erigeron acris, Euphrasia confusa, Glaux maritima,
Holoschoenus vulgaris, Hypericum tetrapterum, Mentha aquatica, Sagina nodosa, Samolus valerandi, Sonchus arvensis, Taraxacum laevigatum, Bryum pseudotriquetrum, Campylium polygamum, Leiocolea badensis, Lophocolea bidentata, Nostqc sp., Preissia quadrata and Riccardia pinguis.
and heavier than in the untreated plots, but symptoms of phosphorus deficiency were
evident, much of the foliage being blue-green. The vegetation cover increased a little,
largely because of a spread of Carices and Junci, which increased from less than a
quarter of the vegetation initially to more than a half of it. finally (see Table 8). The
greatest increases were of Juncus gerardii and Car ex serotina, the latter, in spite of its
small size, making up about one-twentieth of the total vegetation. Agrostis stolonifera
was relatively little affected by the nutrient addition and became dominated by the
sedges and rushes. On the other hand, several of the low-growing dicotyledonous plants
were adversely affected, Plantago coronopus and Prunella vulgaris being eliminated and
Anagallis tenella, Bellis perennis and Leontodon leysseri severely reduced. Field observations suggested that this loss of certain species was more a direct result of the mixture
of salts applied than a competitive effect, although the latter was probably also involved.
It seems possible that the unbalance, in relation to phosphorus, of the high dose of
salts applied may be very unfavourable for some species, but clearly further investigation
of this problem is needed. In general, the results obtained for the areas where only
nitrate was added (+N only in Table 8) were similar to those for the phosphate deficient
areas just described. Juncus articulatus and /. gerardii were appreciably favoured by the
treatment, and the low-growing dicotyledonous plants previously noted were reduced,
some to the point of extinction. There was evidence that Agrostis stolonifera, however,
here increased in its importance.
The addition of the major nutrients except for potassium resulted in changes in the
vegetation similar to those found when complete nutrients were applied. For example,
A stolonifera was much increased, Poa pratensis ssp. subcaerulea was also favoured,
the amount of bare sand was considerably diminished, and Anagallis tenella and
Leontodon leysseri were adversely affected. The vegetation was, however, a little shorter
than that receiving complete nutrients, and the fresh weight yield was also lower,
probably indications that potassium deficiency was to some extent limiting growth.
Where potassium was the only addition made, however, the vegetation was not appreciably different from that of the untreated areas (see Table 8), remaining very short and
forming only a sparse cover.
The results shown in Table 8 allow some assessment to be made of the influence
of the relative deficiencies of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium on the vegetation,
apart from the effects on the floristic composition already described. Clearly the greatest
deficiencies are of nitrogen and of phosphorus, especially of nitrogen, as without added
nitrate the vegetation stayed short and the fresh weight yield was not much higher
than that of the control areas. When phosphate was limiting in instances where the other
major nutrients were applied the yield of the vegetation was on average only about
50% higher than that of the controls, whereas almost three times the yield of the controls
was given by the plots receiving major nutrients except for potassium.
One of the most striking results of this study of the effect of different nutrient regimes
on the vegetation of the slacks is the success of certain Carices and Junci under conditions
of phosphorus deficiency. In view of the healthy growth of Carex flacca in the areas
lacking phosphate it was of interest to assay the level of phosphorus in the tissues to
try to distinguish whether this plant has only a small requirement for phosphorus or a
highly efficient absorptive system. Shoots of C. flacca, collected in June 1961 from
control areas, areas receiving complete nutrients, and from areas treated with complete
nutrients except for phosphorus, were analysed in respect of their phosphorus content.
The plant material was digested with a mixture of nitric, hydrochloric and perchloric
Table 9. The initial composition of turf transplants from a dune slack, and the composition after treatment with various nutrient solutions
Record a refers to the initial composition (on 30 April 1960); b, to the composition after treatment for about 12 weeks (on 21 July 1960); and c to the final
composition (after about 32 weeks, on 8 December 1960). The figures give subjective estimates of the relative bulk of the component plants, except for the final
record which is based on both subjective assessments and fresh weight determinations. The most important species are listed first, and finally those usually present
but in trace quantities only. Other species, not listed, which occur in some of the transplants as traces are: Bryum pseudotriquetrum, Campy Hum polygamum,
Car ex serotina, Centaurium minus, Epipactis palustris, Eupatorium cannabinum, Euphrasia confusa, Festuca rubra, Hypericum tetrapterum, Juncus acutus, J. gerardii,
Linum catharticum, Moerckia flotoviana, Nostoc sp., Preissia quadrata, Sagina nodosa and Sedum acre. All of the records refer to the means of two transplant
cultures for each treatment (for details of treatments see p. 356).
acids, and the phosphate estimated using ammonium molybdate and stannous chloride
by a procedure based on the method of Deniges (1921). Results were obtained as follows:


There was clearly a considerable uptake of phosphate by C. flacca when complete
nutrients were applied, but in the other instances the uptake was small; the difference in
level of phosphorus (expressed in terms of dry weight of tissue) in control plants and in
P-treated plants is at least in part due to the greater growth made by the latter.
(2) The influence of nutrient supply on the growth and composition of turf transplants
from a dune slack
As the turf transplants were collected from the slack in which the effect of mineral
nutrients on the natural vegetation was studied, and close to the two sites involved, the
vegetation initially was fairly similar to that already described.
Table 9 shows the chief effects on the transplants of the various treatments. In spite
of the shelter of a greenhouse, the vegetation stayed short and similar to that of the
natural habitat when a nutrient solution lacking in nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium
was applied. There was, however, some evidence of a more complete plant cover. In
contrast, when complete nutrients were added, the vegetation became quickly dominated
by a dense growth of Agrostis stolonifera which stifled many of the other species; for
example, Anagallis tenella was much diminished, Leontodon leysseri, although favoured
at first, was eliminated, and also eliminated were several bryophytes, Bellis perennis,
Hydrocotyle vulgaris and Plantago coronopus. Apart from Agrostis, the only plants
finally present in notable quantity were the relatively tall-growing Carex flacca and
Pulicaria dysenterica. The much enhanced growth is indicated by the fact that the fresh
weight of the shoot systems of these transplants was more than eight times that of the
transplants lacking nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium.
The vegetation of the transplants receiving nutrients complete except for nitrogen
was only little affected. Growth was, however, greater than that of theN, P, K cultures,
and the vegetation almost completely covered the sand surface. There were no clear
trends of change in the composition of the vegetation, most of the differences shown
for the  N transplants in Table 9 being probably largely attributable to seasonal
effects on growth. The contrast of the short turf of the N transplants, with many
species represented, and of the dense growth of Agrostis stolonifera, with little else
surviving, in the transplants treated with complete nutrients is clear in Phot. 1, which
also shows the effect of nutrients complete except for phosphorus; the dominance of
Carex flacca is easily seen, as well as the plentiful Anagallis tenella, mainly trailing over
the sides of the container. Eliminated from the P transplants were the rosette plants
Bellis perennis, Leontodon leysseri and Plantago coronopus. Agrostis stolonifera was not
greatly affected, the vegetation remaining fairly short, and the fresh weight yield low
(see Table 9); the blue-green appearance of the foliage of all of the plants was very
noticeable.
The effect on the turf transplants of nutrients complete except for potassium was very
similar to that of the complete nutrients. There was a large increase of A. stolonifera,
accompanied by a reduction or elimination of most of the other species. The Agrostis
formed a thick, fairly tall mat in which the only other plants of importance were Carex
Phot. 1. Turf transplants from a dune slack, showing the effect of different treatments with mineral
nutrients.
The transplant on the left received complete nutrients, in the middle complete except for phosphorus
and on the right complete except for nitrogen. The photograph was taken after the treatments had
been applied for 31 weeks (I December 1960). Note the overwhelming dominance of Agroslis stolonifera
in the transplant receiving complete nutrients; the abundance of Carex flacca and of overhanging
Anagallis tenella in the  P culture; and the short turf, with many species, of the  N culture. The scale
in the background is in inches.
flacca and Mentha aquatica. Although there was little difference in height between this
vegetation and that treated with complete nutrients, the fresh weight yield was not quite
so high, a finding in keeping with the observations made in the natural habitat.


DISCUSSION
The effects of the addition of mineral nutrients to the vegetation in its natural habitat
parallel fairly closely the findings from turf transplants studied under greenhouse
conditions. Strong evidence is now available to show, as previously suggested (Willis
& Yemm 1961), that the sparse growth and open character of the vegetation of the Burrows
are brought about mainly by the low levels of nitrogen and phosphorus in the sand,
rather than by the influence of other features of the habitat such as exposure or the
water table.
The present investigations confirm the conclusion reached in earlier studies that
minor mineral nutrients are not in limiting supply. No significant effects of the addition
of minor nutrients to the vegetation of either the dunes or the slacks were detected;
the inclusion of trace elements with the major nutrients did not give rise to effects on the
vegetation, in respect of floristic composition, which were distinguishable from those
given by the major elements alone. There was some indication of a very small improvement in yield when trace elements were included, and it seems possible that there might
be marginal effects of minor nutrients when the major nutrients were added to the
vegetation in very substantial quantities.
In all of the sites in which the vegetation was treated with complete nutrients, grasses
ultimately became dominant, and suppressed many of the other plants. In the lichen-type
pasture both Festuca rubra and Poa pratensis ssp. subcaerulea increased markedly,
finally being the most important components of the vegetation. Species such as Crepis
capillaris and Senecio jacobaea were at first favoured by the nutrient treatment, showing
luxuriant growth compared with that of control (untreated) plants, but they were later
outgrown by the grasses, the thick mat of the latter resulting in the elimination of many
of the small forms. This pattern of change, of a temporary increase of certain broadleaved species but finally the grasses dominating, was found in fact in most of the
sites studied. These results are consistent with the observations on the turf transplants
previously reported (Willis & Yemm 1961); in theshorter term treatment ofthe transplants
the increase of the grasses was, however, not quite so large or the differences in yield
and height of the vegetation quite so striking.
The rapidity with which the grasses dominate the vegetation, and the relative importance, on the dry dune sites treated with complete nutrients, of Festuca rubra and Poa
pratensis ssp. subcaerulea, clearly depend to some extent on their abundance initially;
where the grasses are at first very scanty, dicotyledonous plants may thrive for a
considerable period before the grasses dominate. Competition between Festuca and Poa
must be fairly intense, and their relative success may depend to some extent upon their
water relations. In dry dune pasture sites Festuca usually becomes a clear dominant
when nutrients are added, the dense shoot system which is developed adversely shading
the somewhat shorter and sparser shoots of Poa. Not surprisingly, the low-growing
Thymus drucei and bryophytes, such as Camptothecium lutescens, Hypnum cupressiforme
and Tortula ruraliformis, are quickly reduced in amount or eliminated entirely from
such sites.
Like a number of other grasses, Ammophila armaria shows enhanced vigour when
treated with mineral nutrients, but in dune pasture it does not spread and increase in
growth to the extent approaching that shown, for example, by Festuca rubra. In relict
marram sites, even after treatment for 2 years with mineral nutrients, the vigour of the
marram was not so great as that of marram in an area receiving much blown sand, and
the plants did not flower. Further investigations now in progress bearing on the problem
of the vigour of marram suggest that other considerations than the level of nutrients
in the sand are of great importance.
In the dune slacks and the transplants from the slacks, the vegetation became
dominated by Agrostis stolonifera when treated with complete nutrients, and the variety
of species represented was appreciably reduced. It is of interest to note in this connection
that changes in the floristic composition of the vegetation of hill pastures in Wales,
following manurial treatments, have been recorded by Milton (1940), who showed
that bent grasses increased, particularly where additions of N, P and K were made, and
miscellaneous herbs decreased. Furthermore, Milton observed that Poa pratensis
invaded and spread in manured plots, a finding consistent with the recorded increase
of this grass in several of the sites on the Burrows treated with complete nutrients.
In a subsequent study, Milton & Davies (1947) showed that in some pastures receiving
N, P and K, Festuca rubra became established and increased, whereas F. ovina decreased.
These findings suggest that certain grasses are considerably favoured by high levels of
mineral nutrients, and that in fertile sites they may grow so luxuriantly that other species
cannot survive the severe competition. Experimental evidence that Agrostis stolonifera
has a fairly high phosphorus requirement for vigorous growth has recently been given
by Bradshaw, Chadwick, Jowett, Lodge & Snaydon (1960), who showed that this grass
responds strongly, in respect of dry weight yield, to phosphate up to quite high levels
as compared with a number of other grasses.
That the most acute mineral deficiencies in the sand are of nitrogen and phosphorus
is evident from the results of the investigations on the slack vegetation on the Burrows
themselves and also from the turf transplants. The deficiency of potassium, although
readily detected, is clearly less severe. No characteristic changes in the floristic composition of the vegetation were observed when the deficiences of phosphorus and potassium
were made good, but when nitrogen was lacking; under these conditions the vegetation
remained short and sparse, and similar to that of the untreated plots, an indication that
nitrogen deficiency has a major influence on the growth and composition of the vegetation
since pronounced changes in the relative proportions of the plants and in total growth
ensue when nitrogen is made available.
Of particular interest are the changes in the composition of the slack vegetation
resulting from the addition of nitrogen and potassium, phosphorus being deficient;
the yield of the vegetation was somewhat greater than that of the control plots, but
A. stolonifera was not favoured whereas improved growth was shown by Car ex flacca,
C. serotina, Juncus gerardii and /. articulatus. These plants may have a low phosphate
requirement, or are efficient in the absorption of phosphate as compared with most
plants. The level of phosphorus found in the tissue of Carex flacca from the natural
habitat of the Burrows appears to be below that at which various types of plant show
deficiency symptons (cf. Goodall & Gregory 1947); furthermore, in the areas where
nutrients except for phosphorus are added, C. flacca grows quite well, but the level of
phosphorus in the tissue is even lower. It therefore seems likely that this plant has a low
phosphate requirement, and is preferentially favoured by the addition of nitrogen and
potassium.
The present investigations suggest that in all parts of the Burrows the deficiencies
of the sandy soils in nitrogen and phosphorus, and to a lesser extent in potassium,
are the chief reason why the vegetation is short, the communities remain open, and the
representation of species is so varied; it seems quite probable that these considerations
may also be applicable to a number of other dune systems. Many of the components
of the natural vegetation, and especially the annuals, must have an open habitat if they
are to survive. By treatment with fertilizers, the production can easily be greatly
increased, especially in the slacks where water supply does not limit, and less so in the
higher drier parts where the vegetation is liable to become parched in summer. When
nutrients are abundant, the dense growth of the dune grasses stifles many of the plants
out of existence, and it is noteworthy that over the 2 year period of study of each experimental area, no invasion by species from other habitats was ever observed. This feature
is of interest in relation to the observations of Milton (1940) that over a period of some
years the vegetation of hill pasture plots treated with nutrients was invaded by a range of
'volunteer' lowland species; it is, however, important to realize that Milton's studies
extended over a longer time than the present investigations.
No strongly marked differences in fertility in the different regions of the dune system
have been detected in either the field or the transplant studies. However, the thick growth
of Festuca rubra in areas where Carex nigra is plentiful is doubtless related to the somewhat higher nitrogen content there (cf. Willis et al. 1959a, Table 5). It is also noticeable
that this grass is often tall and thick in the zone where dune slopes merge into the floors
of depressions, regions which, as a result of seepage, may well be somewhat richer in
nutrients than elsewhere. A further point of interest is that Festuca rubra is frequently
seen to be more vigorous in the vicinity of Lotus corniculatus (and in patches where this
plant is known once to have grown) than in immediately adjoining sites where Lotus
is absent, a feature related, in all probability, to the fixation of nitrogen by the legume.
The pronounced effect of nutrients on the vegetation of the Burrows indicates that
other features which have sometimes been advanced to account for the dwarf character
of the natural vegetation are of only subsidiary importance. For example, exposure of
the habitat cannot be a major factor in influencing the growth of the vegetation, since
the plants of turf transplants kept in the greenhouse do not grow substantially better
than in their natural sites, and furthermore the vegetation in the various experimental
areas on the Burrows made fairly tall growth when nutrients were available. Grazing
by rabbits must also be dismissed as a major cause in keeping the vegetation short and
open, particularly as the rabbit population of the Burrows is now very small and no
very pronounced changes in the growth of the natural vegetation have been observed
associated with the reduction of the rabbits.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am indebted to Professor E. W. Yemm for co-operation in field work and for helpful
criticism of the manuscript, to Mr R. L. Jefferies for assistance in the field and for the
estimations of phosphorus, and to Honours students in the Department of Botany,
University of Bristol, for help with the laborious task of cutting and sorting the
vegetation.

SUMMARY
1. The influence of levels of mineral nutrients on the natural vegetation of the Burrows
has been studied by treatment of a number of habitats with various additions of
nutrients. The effect of major nutrients, with and without the addition of minor nutrients,
on the growth and floristic composition of the vegetation of dry dune pasture and
dune slacks has been investigated. In the slacks a more comprehensive examination was
made of the effect of different combinations of major nutrients on the vegetation, and
somewhat parallel studies were undertaken with turf transplants under greenhouse
conditions.
2.  There was no clear evidence of limitation of the vegetation by minor mineral
nutrients, even when the deficiencies of major elements were made good.
3.  When complete nutrients were added to dry dune pasture, the composition of the
vegetation changed very considerably; Festuca rubra and Poa pratensis ssp. subcaerulea
ultimately became strong dominants. A few of the larger dicotyledonous plants (e.g.
Crepis capillaris, Leontodon leysseri, Senecio jacobaed) were temporarily favoured but
after treatment for 2 years were of very minor importance relative to the grasses. Many
of the small plants {e.g. rosette forms, bryophytes) were completely eliminated.
4.  In the dune slacks, Agrostis stolonifera dominated when complete nutrients were
added, and, as on the dry dune pasture, the variety of species was much reduced and the
yield and height of the vegetation were substantially increased (in one site after 2 years
there was a 15-fold increase in height and a 7-fold increase in fresh weight).
5.  When nutrients complete except for nitrogen were added to the vegetation of the
slacks, there was very little improvement in growth, an indication of severe nitrogen
deficiency. On the other hand, limitation of the vegetation by potassium although of
importance, was much less pronounced. Addition of nutrients complete except for
phosphorus gave some improvement in growth and resulted in distinctive changes in
the floristic composition of the vegetation, certain Carices and Junci increasing. Some
evidence is given which suggests that Carex flacca may be a plant of low phosphate
requirement. In contrast, Agrostis stolonifera and Festuca rubra appear to be plants
which respond strongly to high levels of mineral nutrients.
6.  These studies in the natural habitats of the Burrows confirm the conclusions
reached from the investigations on turf transplants that the sparse and open character
of the natural vegetation is largely attributable to the severe deficiencies of nitrogen
and phosphorus. If these deficiencies were not so intense a less varied and taller vegetation, with grasses dominating, might be expected.


