JUNCVS SUBULATUS FORSK. IN THE BRITISH ISLES

By A. J. Willis and Elizabeth W. Davies
Department of Botany, University of Bristol

In May, 1957, two colonies of a perennial rush were found in the salt marsh at Berrow on the North Somerset coast (v.c. 6), in circular patches about 10 m. in diameter that suggested vegetative spread from plants originally established perhaps some ten years be- fore. 
The plant was identified as Juncus subulatus Forsk. after investigations had shown that it was not of hybrid origin, meiosis proving to be quite normal and the pollen good.
This species occurs mainly in salt marshes along Mediterranean shores and has not been
previously recorded in the British Isles. At Berrow the Juncus is surrounded mainly by
Scirpus maritimus, which it has successfully displaced, but is itself sparsely interspersed
with etiolated Glaux maritima, Carex extensa, Atriplex hastata, Juncus gerardii, Triglochin maritima, and Aster tripolium. The formation and the vegetational development of the
Berrow salt marsh are recent and have been described by Thompson (1922, 1928, 1930),
Kendall (1938), and Boley (1942).
An account is given here of the morphology and geographical distribution of the
rush, together with some observations on its ecology in its British habitat and in the
Mediterranean. Some of this information was given at the Society's Exhibition meeting
in November 1958, when herbarium specimens of the Berrow plant were shown.

Morphology and Taxonomy

J. Subulatus was described by Forskal (1775) in Flora Aegyptiaco-Arabica, and later
Desfontaines (1798} described it under the name J. multiflorus (non J. multiflorus Retz.,
1795). Buchenau (1890, 1906) classified J. subulatus as the only member of the subgenus
Junci subulati; the subulate stem leaves, some of which are inserted high on the axis, are
an important diagnostic character.
The British J. subulatus seems to be very similar to the Mediterranean plant. It has
a strong, slightly branched rhizome which creeps c.6 cm. (4-8 cm.) below the mud surface
and is about 6 mm. in diameter. The rhizome bears brown scale-leaves (see Fig. 1 a)
and buds which give rise to rather fragile erect aerial shoots, 2-10 cm. apart. These are
often a metre or more high and 3-4 mm. in diameter at the base where they bear several
shiny brown sheaths. The stems, which are furrowed and in the autumn vinous red at
their bases, bear two to four leaves which are somewhat channelled, non-articulate and
hollow except for evanescent web-like partitions (Buchenau, 1906, p. 102), as in the stem.
The leaves have sheathing bases (c. 10 cm.) and pronounced ligules (Fig. 1 b), and like
the stems are glaucous grey-green during the growing season.
The inflorescence is many-flowered, interrupted, diffuse, and subtended by a short
bract. The pale yellowish-green flowers are about 3-5 mm. long, cup-shaped at first
(Fig. 1 c) and later spreading; each is surrounded by membranous, acute bracteoles with
broad bases (Fig. 1 g). The outer perianth segments are lanceolate, acute, and rather
longer than the inner, which are more obtuse and slightly involute with a iairly broad
subterminal portion, having whitish membranous margins (Fig. 1, e & f). Inserted close
to the perianth are the six stamens with short filaments and anthers c. 1 mm. long.

The unilocular ovary later becomes almost completely trilocular by the ingrowth of
septa, and bears the style (c. 1 mm.) with three pink papillose stigmas which twist clock-
wise, as seen from above (Fig. 1 d). The mature capsule is trigonous (Fig. 1 h), usually
a little shorter than the perianth, shiny reddish-brown, and often mucronate (cf. Fiori & '
Paoletti, 1921, p. 74). Only a few (2-5) of the numerous ovules mature and the longitudin-
ally reticulate seeds are 0-6-1-0 mm. long and slightly appendaged (Fig. 1 i).
Herbarium material indicates that/, subulatus varies little over its range. Cosson and
Durieu, however, described a more slender plant under ]. multiflams Desf. subvar.
sahmis from Algeria (Bory de St. Vincent et al.. 1854-67). The name for this plant is
now /. subulatus f. salinus (Dur.) Maire & Weiller (Maire & Weiller, 1957); it is smaller
than the Berrow rush, has narrower leaves, and a less-branched inflorescence.
Geographical Distribution
The chief area of distribution of ]. subulatus is the Mediterranean (Fig. 2), but the
plant also occurs in the region of the Caspian Sea (Tackholm & Drar, 1950; Maire &
Weiller, 1957). Information about the latter area is, however, so limited that here attention
will be confined to the former. The data on Fig. 2 were compiled from the herbaria of
the British Museum, the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, the University of Bristol, and
various Floras (see references).
]. subulatus is usually a maritime species. It occurs locally around the Mediterranean
and on many of the islands, mostly in salt marshes not far from the sea. Records are
most abundant from North Africa, and the centre of its distribution is almost certainly
in the Nile Delta region of Egypt, where it is especially abundant between Port Said and
Alexandria; it extends southwards up the Nile as far as Asyut (Tackholm & Drar,
1950). /. subulatus is also found at a number of oases inland, especially in the Kharga
and Bahariya regions west of the Nile. The plant is recorded for the fresh water canal at
Port Said, and appears able to survive in non-saline habitats (see also Maire & Weiller,
1957). From Egypt the rush extends westwards along the coast of North Africa, occurring
locally as far as Morocco, inland in the Ahaggar region of the Sahara, and at high altitudes
in the shotts of the Algerian plateaux (Braun-Blanquet, 1932, p. 197). /. subulatus also occurs
locally all along the northern Mediterranean shores from Syria and Turkey to Spain.
Of special interest is its occurrence at two places on the Atlantic coast of Spain (at Bilbao,
and near Oviedo) suggesting a similar distribution to that of certain ' Lusitanian' and
south-western rarities of our British flora, which also appear to reach their northern limit
in south-west England or Ireland. Examples are Scirpus holoschoenus, Helianthemum
apenninum, Juncus pygmaeus, and Asplenium adiantum-nigrum subsp. onopteris; the first is in
some respects ecologically similar to / subulatus but its distribution is more continental
and extends into Siberia, while the last three show a closely similar geographical pattern
in spite of their very varied ecology.

Ecology
(a)  The British Isles
The Berrow salt marsh is of recent origin and has developed between the channel
of the river Parrett and the sand dune system inland. Colonisation of the marsh began
in 1910 and may have been made possible by the formation of a new tributary channel
draining from the muddy Berrow flats into the Parrett. Vegetation was sparse until 1920,
when the commonest plants were Salicornia spp. and Puccinellia maritima (Thompson,
1922).  Spartina townsendii, which was first noticed in 1920, now dominates much of the
Fig. 2. The geographical distribution of/, subulatus; the occurrence of the plant in the Caspian Sea region is not included. Records
based on herbarium specimens are shown by; information on distribution derived from Floras is indicated by hatching.
 

Willis et al. (1959); the results are given in Fig. 3, which shows that the slope of the marsh
is fairly uniform. The lowest area, to seaward, is dominated by Spartina townsendii, and
few other plants are able to survive its competition. In the next zone Scirpus maritimus
is very abundant; it is here that J. subulatus occurs and is clearly dominant in the two
patches where it grows. Both patches are at closely similar levels (21/1 and 21'4ft. O.D.).
In the third zone, at still higher levels, a number of species dominate locally; Juncus
gerardii, Oenanthe lachenalii, Festuca rubra, Carex extensa, Plantago maritima and Glaux
maritima are plentiful. The presence of Iris pseudacorus, Phragmites communis and Typha
latifolia on the landward margin of the zone suggest the influence of fresh water here.
J. subulatus is clearly subject to considerable changes of salinity at Berrow, since the
sites are reached by only the highest tides. The rush is known to tolerate high concentra-
tions of salt (Braun-Blanquet, 1932, p. 193) and at Berrow must at times be growing
under conditions of low salinity. Measurements of the sodium chloride content of the
soil water (using a flame photometer) after a period of fairly high tides in December, 1958,
gave a value of 1"0% at the seaward margin of the colony shown in Fig. 3. At the inland
limit of this colony the sodium chloride content was 09%, and of the second, which is
further inland, 0-7%. The calcium content of the soil water was low (0'01-0*02%) and
the pH between 7'2 and 7'5.

(b)  The Mediterranean
J. subulatus often grows bordering brackish lagoons in southern France and its main
association is Salicornietum fruticosae (Braun-Blanquet, 1952); frequently occurring with
the rush are Salicornia fritticosa, S. radicans, Arthrocnemum glaucum, Puccinellia convoluta,
Triglochin bulbosa, Halimione portulacoides, Limonium vulgare, Suaeda maritima, Aeluropus
littoralis, and Polypogon maritimus. With the last two grasses /. subulatus forms a sub-
association succeeding Salicornietum after burning, which destroys Salicornia, whereas the
Juncus rhizomes survive. Near the mouths of the Rhone, the rush, sometimes accompanied
by Juncus maritimus, dominates areas less saline than those occupied by Salicornia spp.,
but the Juncetum may be progressively invaded by Phragmites communis as the salt content
of the soil diminishes (Molinier, 1948).
In Spain the rush often occurs with Salicornia spp, in littoral calcareous marshes
(A. & O. Bolos, 1950); the commonest associates are Scirpus maritimus, Eleocharis palustris
and Juncus maritimus. Another somewhat similar community is described by Holmboe
(1914, p. 211-2) from Cyprus; here, in a brackish lagoon, its associates included/, acutus,
Scirpus maritimus, Carex divisa and Triglochin bulbosa.
Occurrence and climatic limitation in Britain
J. subulatus must be regarded as a recent arrival, since its only known locality
in Britain has not long been vegetated. It seems likely that the rush was brought in by
shipping or birds from the Mediterranean, and was carried by tidal action to the site
where it is now flourishing.
At Berrow J. subulatus is at its northern limit of distribution (see Fig. 2), and its
flowering season is much later than in the Mediterranean. In North Africa and Syria it
flowers between April and July, and fruits from July onwards, whereas at Berrow and in
the Bristol University gardens it flowers from July or August to September and fruits
correspondingly later, if at all. The fruiting at Berrow seems to depend on a warm dry
summer; in the wet autumn of 1958 only little seed was set, although plants grown in
a greenhouse produced some good fruits and seeds in late September.  Possibly the northern
extension ol the plant is controlled more by the length and temperature of the growing
season than by the low temperature of winter, the rush in this respect perhaps showing
a parallel to Scirpus holoschoenus (Willis, unpublished). The amount of rainfall in summer
may well have an important effect on the fruiting of /. subulatus.
Although the plant may not often produce viable seed at Berrow, it is spreading
sufficiently vigorously by the growth of the rhizome to replace Scirpus maritimus, and gives
every appearance ol becoming an important member of the salt marsh community.

Acknowledgements
We are very grateful to Professor E. W. Yemm for assistance in field work, and to
Mrs. E. W. Yemm for drawing Fig. 1. Our thanks are also due to Mr. N. D. Simpson
and Mr. N. Y. Sandwith for help with literature.
One of us (E. W. D.) is indebted to the Council of the Bristol, 
Clifton and  West of England Zoological Society for the award of a Research Scholarship.

