HYBRIDIZATION IN SOME SPECIES OF PTERIS L.
Trevor G. Walker
Department of Botany, Leeds University
Received July 2, 1957
Introduction
Pteris L. is an almost exclusively trop
ical genus of ferns of some 280 species
(Copeland, 1947), many of which are
distinctive and somewhat isolated. Also
included in the genus, however, are sev
eral complexes containing from a few to
many species. These present great tax
onomic difficulties and the interrelation
ships of the components can often only
be deduced by experimental methods.
One such complex is centered on P.
quadriaurita Retz. and the present paper
deals with the behavior in Ceylon of
three species of this group.
Cytotaxonomic studies carried out over
the last five years (Walker, 1956;
Walker, publication pending) have shown
that this complex contains many separate
species which are superficially very much
alike. Differences nevertheless exist in
such fundamental characters as the level
of polyploidy, type of breeding system,
features of the spores and details of the
juvenile plants. These differences, once
determined by experimental methods, can
then be correlated with relatively small
but constant features on dried specimens,
enabling species to be recognized in
herbaria with, at most, the aid of a
pocket lens.
At least seven species of the P. quadri
aurita complex are to be found growing
in Ceylon, including P. quadriaurita Retz.
sensu stricto itself. Several are eco
logically or genetically isolated from one
another and remain distinct in nature,
but the three to be discussed below have
hybridized freely resulting in the forma
tion of very conspicuous hybrid swarms.
Such hybrid swarms may continue to
segregate and backcross or, under cer
tain circumstances, may become stabilized
as a result of the sexual breeding system
being replaced by apogamy. A complex
situation of this nature has led to tax
onomic difficulties even greater than those
already inherent in the group as a whole.
Materials and Methods
In 1951 an expedition headed by Pro
fessor I. Manton went to Ceylon from
the Botany Department of Leeds Univer
sity, England. The primary purpose of
the expedition was to collect material for
a cytological survey of the Pteridophyte
flora of the island (Manton, 1953) and
numerous living plants and herbarium
specimens of Pteris were turned over
to me for cytotaxonomic investigation
after only a few preliminary chromosome
counts had been made (Manton and
Sledge, 1954).
This material has since been consider
ably augmented as a result of a visit to
Ceylon in 1954 by the author in company
with Dr. Sledge and by generous gifts
from correspondents in Asia, Africa and
Australasia. These gifts included some
6070 species of Pteris all of which have
been studied alive though only a few will
be referred to here.
For each species, adult plants have
been raised from spores in order to study
the complete life cycle. Most of them
proved easy to grow in a heated green
house at an average temperature of 60
80 F, provided they were not over
watered. As a routine practice, spore
mounts were made in glycerine jelly for
a detailed microscopic examination, pro
thalli were examined to determine the
type of breeding system (sexual vs.
apogamous), characteristics of the juve
nile plants were noted, and finally both
meiotic and mitotic chromosomes were
examined by the use of acetocarmine
squashes. In addition many interspecific
hybrids have been made and cytologically
analysed to give data on the interrela
tionships of the species. The technical
methods involved in these processes are
standard (cf. Manton, 1950; Walker, S.
1955, etc.).
A Brief Taxonomic History of the
P. quadriaurita Complex
The type species of the complex, P.
quadriaurita Retz. sensu stricto was
named and described in 1791 by Retzius.
It was based on a specimen collected in
Ceylon by Konig. This species in the
strict sense is confined to Ceylon and
Southern India but the name has been
applied by numerous authors to many
plants from almost the entire range of
the genus. Hooker (1858) in particular
placed a very liberal interpretation on
the name, whilst Hieronymus (1911 and
1914) described a large number of new
species from Africa and Asia which, how
ever, he regarded as being closely allied
to P. quadriaurita.
In Ceylon the situation is complicated
by the existence of a large number of
problematical forms which are difficult to
fit into any specific category. One par
ticularly common form characterized by
the abortion of several pinnules was fig
ured by Beddome (1873) under the name
of P. Otaria and yet another with its
pinnules represented by small lumps was
figured and labelled "P. Otaria var. ?"
A few years later (1883) Beddome
quoted both illustrations under the name
of P. quadriaurita var. ludens. As Bed
dome regarded P. Otaria and P. quadri
aurita var. ludens as synonymous the
term P. Otaria will be used throughout
this paper for the sake of brevity.
Hieronymus (1914) redescribed P.
quadriaurita with a wealth of detail and
included in his description and citations
some forms which showed a small amount
of the abortion of the pinnules so char
acteristic of P. Otaria and concluded that
P. Otaria was not worthy of taxonomic
recognition and was in his opinion pos
sibly a common mutation.
Giesenhagen (1918) on the other hand,
illustrated a series of fronds characterised
by varying degrees of abortion of the
pinnules, and after considering Thwaite's
suggestion (1864) that some of the forms
were of hybrid origin, concluded that all
of these including P. Otaria, represented
developmental stages such as are well
known in some ferns, e.g., Polypodium
Phymatodes L. He suggested that the
abortion of the pinnules depended upon
the lack of availability of nutrients to the
young fronds and was not genetically
determined.
Demonstration of the Hybrid
Nature of P. Otaria
The Ceylon expedition was faced with
a bewildering array of plants of Pteris,
many of which could not be named and
amongst these, specimens more or less
resembling P. Otaria occupied a central
position (cf. Textfig. 1, bg). It seemed
to be crucial therefore to investigate the
status of P. Otaria and to determine
whether or not it was a valid truebreed
ing species or if the whole situation was
being complicated by hybridity or some
other cause.
Living plants of P. Otaria had been
examined cytologically (Manton and
Sledge, 1954; Walker, 1956) and found
to be diploid (2n = 58) and sexual. Fol
lowing a perfectly regular meiosis nearly
100% of wellfilled viable spores were
produced in all such plants. Spores were
collected from one of these plants selected
for its close resemblance to Beddome's
illustration and sown. The prothalli so
obtained were allowed to selffertilize
and a small population of sporophytes
was raised under uniform conditions.
The individuals of this population varied
considerably in the outline of the fronds
as shown in figure 2, ranging from plants
with simply pinnate fronds to some with
completely compoundly pinnate fronds.
Between these two extremes there were
many degrees of intermediates, among
which the parental P. Otaria was repre
sented several times (fig. 2, ef). All
the plants of the population were diploid
and sexual and set about 100% well
filled viable spores following a regular
meiosis. This experiment was repeated
several times, using different plants of
P. Otaria as the source of spores for
raising populations, and each time with
the same result.
The conclusion drawn from these ex
periments is that P. Otaria is not a valid
species but is really a particularly com
mon member of a hybrid swarm which
had been given a specific name and whose
hybrid nature was shown on selffertiliza
tion by the complicated segregation for
frond outline.
Resynthesis of P. Otaria
The problem remained of determining
the species involved in the formation of
this hybrid. It appeared probable from
the range of frond outline among the
segregating progeny (fig. 2, ah) that a
simply pinnate species had hybridized
with a fully compoundly pinnate species.
The only two simply pinnate species in
Ceylon that could be considered in the
role of one parent were P. ensiformis
Burm. and P. multiaurita Ag. Both of
these had been found by the Ceylon ex
pedition and were available alive.
Thwaites (1864) had tentatively sug
gested that P. ensiformis might be in
volved but the cytology showed this to be
extremely improbable as this species is
tetraploid (2n = 116) in contrast to the
diploid hybrid. Further, when P. ensi
formis was crossed with P. Otaria, sterile,
triploid  hybrids   resulted   showing  com
plete failure of pairing of the chromo
somes at meiosis.
P. multiaurita, however, proved to be
a diploid sexual species and furthermore
agreed perfectly with the simplest form
obtained from the segregating P. Otaria
population (fig. 2, a) not only in gross
morphology but also in such critical char
acters as spore detail, and the juvenile
stages. Thus it was virtually certain that
P. Otaria was a hybrid involving P.
multiaurita as one of its parents. This
was confirmed by crossing P. Otaria and
P. multiaurita, resulting in the formation
of hybrids showing complete pairing of
the chromosomes at meiosis and the pro
duction of viable spores.
Anderson, in a long series of papers
(see especially, Anderson 1949) has dem
onstrated that if members of a hybrid
swarm are available for study and one
of the parents is known the characters of
the unknown parent may be deduced,
leading to its identification. Unfortu
nately such elegant techniques as Ander
son's Method of Extrapolated Correlates
could not be used in this instance because
of the lack of several independent vari
ables. However, by making two basic
assumptions a sufficiently detailed de
scription was obtained to identify the
unknown parent. These assumptions
were:
1)   Any character appearing in the hy
brid population and not represented in
P. multiaurita would be due to the in
fluence of the other parent.
2)   Any character appearing in all
members of the hybrid population and
also in P. multiaurita would be common
to both P. multiaurita and the unknown
parent.
The application of such a crude method
gave surprisingly good results and the
descriptions so obtained were of a species
of Pteris which was diploid, sexually
breeding, having fully compoundly pin
nate fronds bearing pinnules with a ser
rated tip, whilst the spores and the details
of the juvenile stages would be virtually
indistinguishable from those of P. multi
aurita.
No plant answering to this description
had been found by the 1951 expedition
but the present writer found plants grow
ing in abundance in restricted areas in
Ceylon in 1954 which tallied perfectly
with the predictions made above. Living
plants and herbarium specimens were
sent to England and later an opportunity
arose of examining the type specimen of
P. quadriaurita Retz. sensu stricto from
the Retzius Herbarium in Lund. The
specimens gathered in 1954 agreed ex
actly with the type specimen and can be
referred with confidence to this species.
Thus it appeared most likely that P.
Otaria was one member of a hybrid
swarm produced as a result of the cross
ing of P. multiaurita and P. quadriaurita
s.s. This hypothesis has now been fully
confirmed by experimentally crossing P.
multiaurita and P. quadriaurita. The Ft
hybrids as shown in figure 3 are morpho
logically much closer to P. quadriaurita
than to P. multiaurita but the F2 genera
tion which has been raised from them
has segregated to give a series of forms
ranging from one parental extreme to
the other and in which P. Otaria is repre
sented several times. This F2 population
completely duplicates the populations pre
viously raised as a result of selffertiliz
ing P. Otaria.
In Ceylon a large number of wild speci
mens of the hybrid swarm almost exactly
matching those raised in cultivation were
collected by the author and a few are
shown in figure 1. Many more inter
mediate frond types were found than are
illustrated and it is evident that multiple
factors are involved, leading to a com
plicated segregation. P. Otaria is not
therefore merely the expression of the
heterozygous condition of one or two
genes.
Field Observations on P. quadri
aurita, P. multiaurita and their
Hybrid Swarms
P. quadriaurita grows in great numbers
at several localities in Ceylon but is re
stricted to such parts of the large virgin
forests which are on the wetter fringe of
the Dry Zone. Such forests do not cast
a very intense shade and in contrast with
those of wetter areas have a very sparse
ground flora. P. multiaurita grows over
much of the area in Ceylon suitable for
the growth of ferns but according to the
writer's observations is to be found only
as small populations, typically of a few
dozen plants or less. This species tends
to favour habitats that are lightly shaded
such as at the edge of forests or where
herbaceous plants or shrubs afford some
protection from the strong light without
casting a dense shade. Thus P. quadri
aurita is numerous in individuals at any
particular locality but such localities are
very restricted in area and distribution,
contrasting strongly with P. multiaurita
which is sparse in individuals but has a
wide distribution in Ceylon.
Where these two species have met in
the past hybrid swarms occur in great
profusion.    Such swarms are very spec
tacular both in the large numbers of in
dividuals and in their very wide distribu
tion in the island. So numerous and
wellestablished are these hybrids and
their segregants that it is probably no
exaggeration to say that they are among
the commonest of any fern in Ceylon.
Roadside banks, paths through forest and
similar examples of disturbed ground
form the typical habitat of these plants.
It would appear from a study of such
populations that once a hybrid has been
established in a particular area it is capa
ble of rapidly colonizing the area with
its segregants and most populations show
a complete spectrum of forms passing
from one parental type to the other.
Where such hybrids meet the large popu
lations of P. quadriaurita of the forests,
backcrossing evidently occurs since on
the fringes of the forest numerous plants
are to be found which approach very
closely the form of the pure species and
only a few approach P. multiaurita in
morphology. Such backcross types are
very rapidly replaced by the pure P.
quadriaurita only a few yards in from
the forest edge, except where broad paths
penetrate the forest.
Since P. multiaurita and P. quadri
aurita can be hybridized in cultivation
with the greatest of ease it appears that
the two species are separated in nature
by ecological barriers only. In the case
of ferns (where there is a wellmarked
alternation of generations) ecological
factors may play an important part in the
life of either the prothallus or the sporo
phyte (or both). Sporophytes of both
these species and members of their hy
brid swarms have been grown in the
tropical greenhouses at Leeds under uni
form conditions of temperature, soil,
moisture, lighting, and humidity, and
they have not noticeably differed in their
reactions to these factors. On the other
hand it was noticed when raising pro
thalli under uniform conditions that these
differed in the vigor of their growth and
after experimenting a little it was found
that  satisfactory growth  was  dependent
on the degree of shading received. Thus
the prothalli of P. multiaurita grew most
vigorously in lightly shaded conditions
and not so well in either full light or
heavy shade, whilst those of the hybrid
swarm were only vigorous in welllighted
conditions and rapidly declined in vigor
and eventually died as the amount of
shading was increased. These reactions
of the prothalli to light are of interest as
there is a striking correlation with the
conditions under which the plants grow
in nature, P. multiaurita growing in
lightly shaded places such as the edge of
forests, etc., as has been noted previously,
whilst the hybrid swarms grow on dis
turbed grounda habitat which is typ
ically welllighted.
Prothalli of P. quadriaurita showed a
very high tolerance to a large range of
lighting conditions and exhibited in culti
vation little difference in vigor when
grown in full light or dense shade, sug
gesting that ecological factors operate
here not on the prothalli as in the other
two instances quoted but on the sporo
phyte. The bareness of the forest floor
in localities where this species grows
suggests that freedom from competition
from other plants may be of importance
here.
It seems likely, therefore, that P. multi
aurita and P. quadriaurita are ecologi
cally separated by the two factors of light
and competition, the former factor oper
ating at the prothallial stage of P. multi
aurita and limiting this species to habitats
which are lightly shaded, whilst the latter
factor is important in the sporophytic
stage of P. quadriaurita, limiting this
species to habitats in which there is free
dom from competition from other low
growing plants. Where one habitat abuts
onto the other, as at the edge of the Dry
Zone forests, hybrids are formed and
these fertile sexual hybrids and their
segregants can colonise almost any area
of ground which is sufficiently well
lighted to enable the prothalli to grow.
The past history of the hybrid swarms
must no doubt remain a matter for con
jecture but it is difficult to resist the
suggestion that their incidence is likely
to have been greatly increased by disturb
ances associated with the sudden and
spectacular opening up of the country by
new roads, and by the felling of large
areas of forest in the wetter parts of the
Island to make way for the establishment
of large coffee and, later, tea estates dur
ing the past one and a half centuries.
A Further Complication
A third member of the P. quadriaurita
complex in Ceylon is a species known as
P. confusa T. G. Walker (Walker, pub
lication pending). This is diploid (2n
= 58) and apogamous and has a fairly
wide distribution in the wetter parts of
the Island. In common with other
apogamous ferns this species produces
prothalli which, whilst lacking functional
archegonia, do produce numerous an
theridia releasing perfectly normal sper
matozoids. In consequence such prothalli
can be used in hybridization experiments
as male parents provided that prothalli of
a sexual species are used as the female
parents. In this way hybrids have been
raised in cultivation between P. confusa
on the one hand and P. quadriaurita, P.
multiaurita and several members of the
P. quadriaurita x P. multiaurita hybrid
swarm on the other hand. Such hybrids
are triploid since, although both the
parent sporophytes are diploid the male
gametes of the apogamous species are
unreduced in chromosome number.1
These triploid hybrids have a some
what reduced proportion of viable spores
which, however, inherit the apogamous
mechanism and this has two important
consequences:
1)   The hybrids are fertile, since the
viable spores give rise to apogamous
prothalli.
2)   Due to the loss of the sexual mecha
nism the hybrids do not segregate
and hence breed true indefinitely.
1 The reader who is unfamiliar with the cyto
logical mechanism of apogamous ferns is recom
mended to read Manton (1950), Chapter 10.
A series of four fronds has been se
lected and illustrated in figure 4, ad,
showing the range of frond outlines that
are produced. If this illustration is com
pared with figure 1 it will be apparent
how closely these triploid hybrids con
form in outline to the last 4 or 5 members
of the diploid sexual hybrid swarm
shown. The simpler members of the
series are, however, not duplicated.
Such experimentally produced triploid
hybrids are not purely of theoretical in
terest since wild hybrids of this parentage
have been found growing in Ceylon by
the writer though as yet only as single
plants. In the Catchment Area of Kandy
at the top of MottanaPottana, hybrid
swarms of P. quadriauritaP. multiaurita
origin may be found growing interspersed
with P. confusa and occasional triploid
hybrids of the type illustrated in figure 4
may be found. This area has been rad
ically altered in character in little more
than a century, having been originally
thick forest which was then cut down to
make way for a tea estate. At the be
ginning of the present century the tea
estate was abandoned and then planted
with trees which have now grown to
a great height, restoring the original
forest conditions in a modified form
(T. B. Worthington, personal communi
cation). Such violent alterations in the
character of the habitat suggests that
these triploid hybrids are of very recent
origin and have been formed in the last
phase of these changes. It would be
interesting to see if over the course of
the next few decades these fertile hybrids
will build up into large populations.
Discussion
The taxonomic confusion caused by the
hybridization of P. quadriaurita and P.
multiaurita has been great especially since
the descendants of such hybrids are often
commoner than either parent. This con
fusion has resulted in the giving of such
names as P. Otaria and P. quadriaurita
var. ludens to what are now known to be
nothing more than morphologically con
spicuous segregants of hybrid swarms.
This could not have been worked out
from herbarium studies alone, still less
could the true nature of the triploid hy
brids stabilized by apogamy have been
deduced without the application of ex
perimental methods.
It can now be recommended that in
the Ceylon flora any fern having a mor
phology falling within the range included
by figure 1, bg and figure 4, ad should
be designated as a hybrid and that specific
names should only be retained for P.
multiaurita (fig. 4a), P. quadriaurita
(fig. 4c) and P. confusa (fig. 4b).
If it is desired to distinguish between
sexual (fig. 1, bg) and apogamous hy
brids (fig. 4, ad) this can be done by
reference to the spores. The diploid
sexual hybrids all have nearly 100% well
filled light brown spores which are about
30/t in diameter whilst the triploid apog
amous hybrids have spores of which only
at most 40%, and usually far less, are
wellfilled, dark brown, and very large,
the remaining percentage being small,
shrivelled and obviously nonviable.
The retention of separate specific
names for P. multiaurita and P. quadri
aurita is not necessarily disturbed by the
fact that the two species have the close
relationship of ecotypes. There is ample
precedent for the taxonomic recognition
of ecotypes as species in suitable cases
and when it is convenient to do so (e.g.,
Melandrium rubrum and album Baker
(1948), Coprosma propinqua and robusta
(Allan, 1929), Salvia apiana and mel
lifera (Anderson and Anderson, 1954)
etc., etc.). In the genus Pteris there are
many unrelated species which show a
deceptive morphological resemblance but
which must necessarily be treated as
separate. In P. quadriaurita and P.
multiaurita on the other hand the mor
phological differences are so extreme that
it is certainly a matter of herbarium con
venience to name them separately.
A word of warning is, however, neces
sary about  the  continued  uncritical  use
of the name P. quadriaurita sens. lat. for
plants from regions outside the restricted
area of southern India and Ceylon in
which P. quadriaurita Retz. sens, strict.
is known to occur. Several such plants
have been received from collectors in
Africa and Australia, some of which have
been investigated experimentally in a
preliminary way with very diverse re
sults. Thus a West African plant when
crossed with P. multiaurita from Ceylon
formed vigorous hybrids quite readily but
at meiosis these hybrids showed only
partial chromosome homology and were
sterile. Another plant from Australia
would not hybridise with P. multiaurita
at all. It is therefore recommended that
the name P. quadriaurita should not in
future be used in any sense other than
that of Retzius sens, strict, and that other
names should be found for the very num
erous superficially similar species in other
parts of the world.
Apart from these taxonomic implica
tions the evolutionary situation revealed
within the complex in Ceylon is of un
usual interest. Thus the emergence of
P. quadriaurita and P. multiaurita as
either separate ecotypes or separate spe
cies is the first case in ferns in which a
wholly genetical evolutionary mechanism
has been detected in action uncomplicated
by polyploidy and not yet involving
disturbance to chromosome homology.
Their divergence is certainly recent in
terms of relative fern chronology since
this divergence, though considerable, af
fects only a few characters and the geo
graphical range is small. Recent human
interference in Ceylon has broken through
the ecological barriers separating them and
hybrid swarms have resulted. Continued
destruction of the natural habitats in the
future could lead to local extinction of the
more sensitive of the two, namely P.
quadriaurita. In such a case one might
expect that one or more new forms
adapted to the new environmental condi
tions might become stabilized from the
descendants of hybrids.
The apogamous hybrids with P.  con
jusa, which have certainly been formed
during the last half century or so, are of
interest as an example of how triploid
apogamous populations indistinguishable
from species could arise. At present such
hybrids are sporadic in occurrence but
they are very vigorous and have a high
spore output in spite of the reduced per
centage of viable spores and there seems
no reason why true breeding and abun
dant local populations should not be pro
duced from them in time. Whether or
not this will occur in any particular case
cannot be predicted in advance since it
will depend on local opportunity as well
as on adaptive vigour and reproductive
capacity. We know, however, that some
thing comparable to this has happened
many times in nature since apogamous
fern species are more commonly triploid
than any other ploidy.
It is evident that the whole P. quadri
aurita complex is unstable and is still in
a state of active change in which con
tinued speciation and evolution can be
expected.
Summary
Three species of the Pteris quadriaurita
complex of ferns in Ceylon have been
studied cytotaxonomically. These are P.
quadriaurita Retz. sensu stricto, P. multi
aurita Ag., P. confusa T. G. Walker.
It has been found that P. quadriaurita
s. s. and P. multiaurita have marked eco
logical preferences and both are diploid
and sexual. Where the natural habitat
has been disturbed by man these two
species frequently hybridize and vast hy
brid swarms showing a complicated segre
gation are formed. Some of these
segregants have been given names by
taxonomists, notably P. Otaria and P.
quadriaurita var. ludens but their het
erozygous condition in nature has been
clearly demonstrated by breeding from
them and they have also been resynthe
sised from the parental species.
P. quadriaurita and P. multiaurita have
diverged relatively recently and this is
the first analysis to be made in the ferns
which has involved speciation depending
on genetic change alone without involv
ing loss of chromosome homology or
polyploidy.
P. quadriaurita, P. multiaurita or their
hybrids cross with P. confusa, a diploid
apogamous species to produce triploid
apogamous hybrids which breed true.
Such di or trihybrids are so distinctive
morphologically that if their history had
not been known they could well have
been given specific names. This may be
necessary in the future if homogeneous
populations become established from
sporadic individuals which exist at
present.
It is evident that the P. quadriaurita
complex as a whole has not become fully
stabilized and continued evolution and
speciation is to be expected.
Acknowledgments
The writer is indebted to the Agricul
tural Research Council, to the Scholar
ships Committee and to the Priestley
Fund of Leeds University for grants
which made possible his visit to Ceylon;
to Mr. A. H. G. Alston of the British
Museum (Natural History) and Mr. F.
Ballard of the Royal Botanic Gardens,
Kew, for much help; to the Director of
Agriculture, Peradeniya, Dr. Joachim, and
to the Assistant Director, Mr. Joseph, for
transport facilities; to Mr. Jayaweera,
Peradeniya, and his assistants for much
help; to Mr. T. B. Worthington of Kandy
for his very generous hospitality; and to
Mr. B. Clarke, Leeds, for photographic
help.
A special debt of thanks is owed to
Professor I. Manton for her help and
encouragement.
