LECANOPTERIS SPINOSA A NEW ANTFERN FROM INDONESIA
A.C. JERMY
British Museum (Natural History) London SW7 5BD.
and T.G.WALKER
Dept. Plant Biology, University of Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU
ABSTRACT
Whilst collecting plants in the LatimojongMnts.,Sulawesi (Celebes) the authors found
a new species of antinhabited fern here described as Lecanopteris spinosa sp. nov. An
account of the morphology and anatomy is given and comparisons are made with
other species variously placed in the genera Lecanopteris Reinw. and Myrmecophila
(Christ) Nakai. On grounds of anatomy and rhizome morphology it is argued that the
new species is intermediate between these genera thus supporting Copeland's view
that they should be united. The highly developed rhizome structure is discussed in
relation to the ants that inhabit it.
INTRODUCTION
In 1824 Reinwardt described a fern which he called Onychium carnosum, unaware
that Kaulfuss (1820) had already used the generic name for another totally different
species. No sooner than the name was published Reinwardt became aware of his
mistake and in 1825 published a substitute generic name, Lecanopteris. Blume (1828a)
elaborated the description emphasizing that the species was distinct from any other
Polypodium in having a peculiar habit with a swollen rhizome and sori immersed at the
reflexed tips of the pinnae segments. Later (1828b) he figured L.carnosa together with
a variant which he called L.pumila although the text description of this new species
never appeared.
The genus was upheld by some pteridologists (e.g., Presl 1836, Fee 1852) whilst
others (e.g. Mettenius 1856; Hooker & Baker 1868, 1874) still preferred to treat it
under a large and variable Polypodium. Cesati (1876) described a related species (now
L deparioides (Ces.) Bak.) under Davallia believing the reflexed leaf tip to be similar
to the indusium of that genus. In 1881 however Baker accepted Lecanopteris and
described a fourth species (L. incurvataj from Sumatra placing it here on account of its
soral structure alone, as his specimen (Curtis 24: K) was without a rhizome. Later
collections of what is undoubtedly the same species (e.g. Benkoelen, Brooks, s.n.
192023; BM) show a typical swollen and naked rhizome.
Christ (1897), whilst not accepting the generic rank, did however accept the
taxonomic concept of Baker (et alia) and he went further and grouped together four
other species of Polypodium which had similar swollen antinhabited rhizomes, under
the section Myrmecophila, a name legally instated at generic rank by Nakai (1929).
Whilst the rhizomes of Myrmecophila were ant inhabited and often massive they were
not naked but covered with distinct clathrate, darkcentred scales. The sori were
superficial, although sometimes deeply immersed lying close to the rachis or costa.
This taxonomy was maintained although some [e.g. van Alderwelt van Rosenburgh
1909) went further and included Lecanopteris as a subsection withinsection
Myrmecophila, when others (e.g. Ching 1940) accepted both as genera. Copeland
(1905) maintained Lecanopteris (pro gen.) but placed Myrmecophila as a section of
Polypodium. In 1929 he pointed out the affinity of the former to Microsorium sect.
Phymatodes and its relationship to Myrmecophila which he proposed (1929: 122)
should  be united under Lecanopteris, a position he maintained in 1947 and 1960.
Holttum (1954) placed the two species of section Myrmecophila found in Malaya in
Phymatodes Presl. [P. sinuosa (Wall, ex Hook.) J. Sm.;P. Crustacea (Copel.) Holtt.] on
the grounds that they "have all the characters ... [of Phymatodes] apart from the
swollen rhizome". They do not however have the characteristic knobbly, branched
paraphyses amongst the sporangia as the other species of this genus, e.g. P.
scolopendria (Burm.) Ching. Lecanopteris, with its distinct sori and clathrate scales,
Holttum keeps as a separate genus.
The finding of an antfern in Sulawesi with a swollen, naked rhizome but with
fronds with the texture and sori of L. sinuosa places it intermediate between sections
Lecanopteris and Myrmecophila. Although in the two genera the position of the sori
varies and this is correlated with the dissection of the frond, the vascular supply to it
and its general structure is similar. The species examined by us are listed under the two
sections in Table 1. In all, the maturing fertile sporangia are immersed in a mat of long
setae topped by an abortive sporangium which often breaks away leaving a curious
cupshaped head and which, although possibly homologous with the branched
paraphyses of other Microsorioid genera, should not be confused with them. The
rhizome architecture varies from the more massive irregular growth pattern in L
Crustacea through L. spinosa, both without scales, to the regular L. sinuosa with scales;
L. mirabilis is irregular and expansive with often an almost naked upper surface;
according to Copeland (1929) L. sinuosa has a Papuan form (not seen by us) with a
glabrescent rhizome. Except for L. davallioides and L. nieuwenhuisii, where we have
seen no rhizome material, all the species in section Lecanopteris have uniseriate,
occasionally branched, trichomes on the epidermis of the young rhizome. In
anatomical structure both the rhizome and frond of L. spinosa are similar to L.
carnosa and L. sinuosa (cf. Yapp 1902).
It is seen that L. spinosa is intermediate between the two sections as hitherto
defined and is further proof in support of Copeland to unite Myrmecophila and
Lecanopteris under the latter. If the degree of organisation and adaption of the
rhizome is significant, L. spinosa would be the most advanced member of section
Lecanopteris.
DIAGNOSIS AND DESCRIPTION
Lecanopteris spinosa Jermy & Walker sp. nov. (fig 1 et sequ.)
Planta myrmecophila epiphytica. Rhizoma glabrum ventricosum 2.54 cm crassum, ramis brevibus
lateralibus, porticus ad apicem capiens, initio subviride pruinosum, demum nigrum coriaceum,
spinis ad 6 mm conicis attenuatis. Frondes exstipitatae, bifariae, usque ad 30 x 5 cm (frondes
steriles saepe 68 cm longae); rhachis flavovirens; lamina frondum sterilium simplex, frondum
fertilium pinnatifida lobata, apices loborum rotundatis; venae anastomosantes, areolae venulis
liberis clavatis includentibus. Son immersi uniseriati prope rhachidem, sporangia initio sporangibus
sterilibus elongatis obtecta at sine paraphysibus ut in speciebus nonnullis Microsorii. Sporae
monoletes (56) 69(82.5)pm longae luteolae laeves.
Typus Indonesia, Sulawesi, Latimojong Mnts, SW slopes of Mnt. Rantemario, below Buta Jakke
above base camp; on Platea latifolia Bl. in mixed oakpodocarp forest, at 1950 m alt., 10 November
1969, A.C. Jermy 7609; holotypus in BM; isotypi in BO, GH, L.
Paratypus: Loco citato, T.G. Walker T12179 (in herb Walker).
Plants epiphytic, found on the upper branches (36 cm thick) of trees 1520 m high.
Primary rhizome 2.54 cm thick, the advancing front somewhat flattened and
adpressed to the substrate and budding off lobes which develop into lateral branches
2.55 cm long, 13 cm thick, and which on maturity swell to press against each other
(see fig 2). In all the plants studied the main axis of the rhizome soon orientated itself
across the branch and gradually encircled it. When the first complete turn has been
achieved the main rhizome continues to grow in the same direction on top of the old
dead, leathery rhizome. Thus a "ball" of rhizome would result often three or four
stems thick, each growing epiphytically on itself and in which there would be usually
only one advancing apex although occasionally a side branch would continue growth
for a time. It is possible that such "balls", found up to 25 cm across, could contain
more than one plant but this seems unlikely.
Living rhizomes are pale green with a pronounced glaucous bloom on the
younger parts which dries as flat, platelike scales of white wax. Scales absent but the
very young epidermis is sparsely covered with simple, very rarely branched, caducous
trichomes of four to eight cells uniseriately arranged, the terminal cell'of which is not
obviously glandular. Epidermis minutely papillate with scattered multicellular spines,
46 mm long, narrowly conical, or cylindrical and tapered with a swollen conical base,
occasionally consisting of this only, green and flexuous often turning black before the
rest of the epidermal tissue. Green rhizome becoming black (see para, on anatomy) as
fronds absciss; the tissue eventually dying as the outer layers become horny or
leathery. The meristematic tissues of the lateral branches die at this stage and the
invaginated apex is often perforated as the tissues shrink (see below).
Fronds, in two ranks on the main rhizome, not normally seen on the lateral
branches although some are initiated there; for the most part initiated on the
meristematic front of the rhizome which develops, as the leaf ages, into a conical
phyllopodium, stipe virtually absent, articulate to rhizome, the fronds falling as the
rhizome blackens. Lamina up to 30 x 5 cm (often only 68cm long in sterile fronds),
linearoblanceolate tapering below to form in the lower 25 cms a wing along the
rachis, apex rounded, often imperfect and emarginate, margin entire in small sterile
fronds to undulate or + regularly lobed ^ to the rachis in fertile fronds (see fig 1);
texture coriaceous, dull, pale green, midrib distinct, yellowish green, raised on the
adaxial side and with a narrow ridge on the abaxial surface, the veins conspicuous on
drying, anastomosing to form areolae with included free veinlets (see fig 3).
Sori in one row close to and either side of the rachis usually in the upper  of
the leaf only; circular on flat immersed receptacles which cause projections on the
upper surface; sporangia protected in the early stages by longstalked abortive
sporangia which overtop them and whose heads touch one another to form a compact
layer (see fig 25). Spores monolete, pale yellow (56) 69 (82.5) pm long (in a
sample of 50), sporoderm smooth under the SEM with only the occasional papilla in
the region of the suture.
ANATOMY
1.   The root
The roots are short, black and wiry and cling to the substrate and when developed in
the chambers produce copious roothairs. The xylem is diarch and there is a
particularly well defined pericycle (fig 26). Abutting onto the endodermis is a ring of
cells with heavily thickened walls about seven cells in depth, except opposite the
protoxylem points where it is interrupted. This is identical to the root structure of L.
carnosa as described by Yapp (1902).
2.   The rhizome
In the young parts the spines, which are such a conspicuous and permanent feature of
this plant are green and flexible when young, consisting of cells with living contents
and having lignified walls. As they age the cells lose their contents (fig 24) and the
spines become rigid. They first blacken at the tip and then ultimately throughout, this
blackening frequently preceding that of the rhizome discussed later.
The rhizome epidermis consists of thick walled cells and is devoid of stomata (fig
7). Overlying the cuticle is a very thick transparent, wax, becoming white on drying seen
under the SEM as irregular flakes which harden to the surface when the rhizome
blackens. As in some other species of Lecanopteris e.g. L. carnosa, the rhizome
blackens with age and a curious feature in L spinosa is that frequently the boundary
between green and black areas is absolutely sharp as if drawn by a pen. Although, as
ageing occurs, there is a gradual browning of the underlying tissues, the black
appearance is entirely caused by the deposition of dense melanic substances in the
epidermal layer only (fig 12).
Immediately beneath the epidermis there is a layer a few cells deep which is
lignified and internal to this is parenchyma. In the centre of the young parts of the
rhizome the parenchyma forms a very distinctive water storage tissue which can be
distinguished by the naked eye by its lighter colour. In this tissue the cells are much
larger than those of the surrounding parenchyma, are elongated vertically and have a
glistening translucent appearance due to their high water content. It is the breakdown
of this tissue which leads to the formation of the cavities.
The water storage tissue is of short duration, rarely being found intact more than
about two centimetres behind the apex of the main stem of the branches. This agrees
with the situation as described for L. carnosa by Yapp but although he described some
of the anatomical details their possible importance in the formation of the cavities
appears to have eluded him as he believed that only very young plants (which he did
not possess) would provide the answer.
The innermost one or two layers of the parenchyma bordering onto the water
storage tissue are not especially prominent at first, being thin walled and tending to be
aligned with their long axes in the same plane as the cells of the water storage tissue
(arrowed in fig 13). Later on, however, these parenchyma cells divide to form a very
conspicuous delimiting layer from which fingerlike processes project between the
outermost cells of the water storage tissue (fig 14). This later stage is illustrated by
Yapp (1902). The cells of this delimiting layer become rapidly and progressively more
suberized and when this process has reached a certain stage the water storage tissue
also develops a very small amount of suberization. At this point the delimiting layer
apparently cuts off the once more or less intimate contact between the water storage
tissue and the ground parenchyma of the rhizome, with the subsequent disintegration
of the water storage tissue and the resultant space forming a chamber lined by a layer
of dark suberized cells. If a young apex is sectioned the development of the delimiting
layer, its progressive suberization and the breakdown of the water storage tissue can be
seen as a continuous process occurring over a distance of 0.51 cm. Hence the
chambers or galleries are constantly being extended, keeping pace with the elongation
of the rhizome.
The apices of young rhizome lobes or of the lateral branches are frequently
invaginated and have the appearance of a "pore". On dying the parenchymatous cells
at the base of this pore shrink and break down thus linking the chamber with the
exterior. It is through such natural openings that ants gain entrance to the galleries.
The cells lining these openings are similar to those in the galleries suggesting that the
opening has been formed in much the same way as the galleries themselves.
In actively growing portions of the rhizome there is a "lip" on the leading edge
which consists of young dividing cells forming the meristem. It is in this region that
the leaf primordia and the spines arise (marked a in fig 1). This extends along the
growing margin and no single apical cell was detected, although it would be
exceedingly difficult to find if it did exist without microtoming a considerable number
of sections. Toward the sides as the rhizome matures, or in the lateral branches of
limited growth, the edges tend to be more or less rounded, the parenchyma comprising
the bulk of the rhizome being fully expanded and enclosed in a layer of lignified cells
on both upper and lower surfaces and bounded by the epidermis. Further back in the
blackened areas, all the cells become orangeyellow and spongy in texture.
The rhizome is permeated with a network of vascular strands which are
embedded in the parenchyma above and below the galleries (see fig 15) but which are
absent from the water storage tissue where this is present. The individual strands are
very similar in structure to the vascular supply of the root (fig 26) except that
immediately outside the endodermis there is at most a single layer of thickened cells.
The pattern of the galleries tends to be rather more complex in this species than
in most others of Lecanopteris. Here they tend to be on three levels with a major
gallery running along the entire length of the rhizome and giving off frequent
chambers above and below which interconnect with one another. The layout is not so
clear as in some other species such as L carnosa and L. deparioides where the rhizome
can be likened to a series of flasks joined together, each bearing a frond and having one
or more chambers within. In L. spinosa the fronds tend to be somewhat sparse and the
rhizome not organised into units joined together, other than the lateral branches.
According to the position of the cut, at any part of an opened rhizome there may be
seen three lines of chambers or else large irregular spaces where all the chambers meet
(see fig 1). Thus there is a continuous network of galleries and chambers throughout
the plant as in all of the Asiatic antferns. This is in contrast to the New World species
of Solanopteris, described in detail recently by Hagemann (1969) and Wagner (1972),
in which the rhizome is dimorphic andthe inflated areas are produced on short shoots.
3. The frond
The upper surface of the lamina is devoid of stomata unlike the lower epidermis which
is richly provided with them (figs 89) the mean length of the guard cells being 46//m
(range 41 52//m in a sample of 50). The photosynthetic region consists of several
layers of cells which are densely filled with chloroplasts and form a spongy mesophyll.
Yapp (1902) reports the presence in L carnosa of a single layer of large colourless cells
immediately beneath the upper epidermis which possibly forms a hypodermal water
reservoir but in L. spinosa the situation is somewhat variable, even in the same section.
In   some   areas  the   layer   is  clearly  present,  containing  conspicuous  cells which
completely lack chloroplasts, whilst in other areas these cells are less obvious and
contain some chloroplasts, although fewer in number than in the spongy mesophyll.
The fronds are initiated at the edge of the rhizome and are completely naked
throughout life. Each is borne on a prominent coneshaped leaf base (phyllopodium)
and there is a welldefined dehiscence region present from the beginning which results
in the old fronds being shed cleanly. This region consists of a layer of rather
irregularly shaped, but more or less isodiametric cells some 12 rows deep, which
contrast with the more elongated cells on either side, i.e. in the base of the stipe and in
the top of the phyllopodium. The cell walls of the dehiscence layer, with the
exception of the uppermost 2 or 3 rows, start to thicken early in development and can
be seen even when the young frond has just unfurled (fig 10). Lignification proceeds
and ultimately a layer some 20 or more cells thick caps an old leaf base from which
the frond has been shed (fig 11). Dehiscence occurs by tearing along the uppermost
two or three rows of unlignified cells, and their torn remains may be seen in section.
This behaviour contrasts with that reported by Phillips & White (1967) for
representatives of several genera belonging to the Polypodiaceae in which a specialised
dehiscence layer was by no means so conspicuous.
Six or seven vascular strands are present in the leaf base and traverse the
dehiscence layer into the bottom of the rachis, where they become orientated into two
vertical rows (fig 16). The upper two strands nearest the adaxial side of the rachis tend
to be more conspicuous than the others and are elongated transversely. They approach
one another more closely at successive levels up the rachis and quickly fuse to form a
very prominent trace which then persists through the remaining length of the rachis.
This behaviour is in contrast to that of the other strands which gradually decrease in
number by a process of fusion and finally disappear near the tip, leaving only the
conspicuous trace noted above (figs 1623).
The sori are produced in a single row on either side of the rachis and are deeply
impressed (fig 1). The base of the sorus is richly supplied by vascular tissue which is
delimited from the other tissues of the lamina by a single continuous layer of very
thick walled cells on the under side only and abutting on to the endodermis. One
might speculate as to whether or not this is a device whereby the supplies carried in
the vascular strands are diverted to supplying the sorus rather than the underlying
tissues of the lamina. There is no mention of this structure in Yapp's account of L.
carnosa and we failed to find it in our sections of L sinuosa and L. deparioides.
ANTFERN RELATIONSHIP
The rhizome galleries of L. spinosa were inhabited by a species of Crematogaster.
Specimens have been deposited in the Department of Entomology, British Museum
(Natural History). It is possible that other genera or species of ants were commensal in
the rhizome but we have no evidence of this; Gomez (1974) found at least three
genera coexisting in Solanopterisbrunei (Werkle ex Christ) Wagner. Ants gain access to
the chambers through the apical cavities of the lateral branches and we have no
evidence that the ants eat their way into the chambers as do Azteca sp. into
Solanopteris (Gomez, I.e.) although they may physically remove dead cells and other
detritus that accumulates in the aperture. A full discussion on the evolution of the
interaction of Iridomyrmex myrmecodiae with Lecanopteris sinuosa and other
mymecophytes in Sarawak is given, by Janzen (1974). The following observations are
given in support of his ideas.
The affect of the plant on the ant
Apart from shelter ants may absorb moisture from the living tissue either directly or
indirectly. The outer epidermis of L spinosa is hard and impervious to water but rain
water could perculate through open phyllopodia or apical "pores" and become
absorbed on the spongy dead parenchyma thus maintaining a moist atmosphere within
the chambers. To "what extent the Lecanopteris attracts other arthropods which in
turn are captured by Crematogaster, by being a source of food or shelter was not
observed but little evidence of such is seen on dried material now before us. On
analysis, the heaps of debris found rarely at the ends of the galleries consisted mainly
of heads (and leg and mouthparts) of Crematogaster and no other specifically
recognisable remains except coleopteran (?) larva/castes and elytra and many
fragments of insect wing and limbs.
That the fern offers food in the way of highly nutritious spores or young or
abortive sporangia has been suggested by several workers (Holttum 1954a, b,; Janzen
1974). Certainly in many cases the whole sorus is removed, presumably by some
grazing animal and often the lamina beneath the sorus is also eaten away. As Holttum
(1954b) reports for L sinuosa, the paraphysislike abortive sporangia are full of
globules that have the appearance of oil bodies, although we found these difficult to
stain with Sudan blue/red. In all the species of Lecanopteris studied by us most of the
abortive sporangial heads had been lost at the time of sporangial dehiscence leaving a
characteristic broken cell at the top of the seta. This may be due to natural fall off or
to grazing by ants but it must be admitted that this type of "paraphysis" is seen in
many Microsorium species not associated with ants. We have not investigated the
chemistry of the rhizome tissue and it is possible that the large parenchymatous cells
described above contain sugars similar to those in Solanopteris (Gomez, I.e.). Ants are
certainly found in the green succulent rhizome. .
The effect of the ant on the plant
Holttum speculates that in return for shelter provided by the plant the ants bring in
mineral substances from the ground and also some nitrogen in their excreta. No
evidence of the former was found in L. spinosa and no mineral carton was seen
associated with the species as is often the case with other myrmecophytes, e.g.
Hydnophytum and Myrmecodia (Janzen 1974). Fern roots were seen to penetrate the
cavities, usually through broken down phyllopodia, and once inside developed copious
root hairs; whether they absorb anything other than water has yet to be proved.
Another hypothesis is that frequently put forward, and with good evidence, in
connection with some flowering plants which also show an association with ants,
namely that the ants protect the plant from attack by insects. Our limited observations
suggest that first, the ants tended to flee rather than attack when the plant was
touched and second, fronds and sori showed signs of being eaten presumably by a
herbivorous insect other than the ants themselves. In L spinosa and in the genus as a
whole the young fleshy parts of the rhizome are devoid of scales or very poorly
furnished with them whilst at the same time occupying an exposed position in the tree
canopy. Certain parallels exist between this situation and that discussed in some detail
by Janzen (1966) for the "swollen thorn" acacias of Central America. It is certain that
in cultivation, slugs will seek out Lecanopteris rhizomes in preference to other fern
species. This was demonstrated at Newcastle when 39 sporelings of L. mirabilis were
raised, in the absence of ants, dispersed among several propagating frames and
intermixed at random among several hundred sporelings belonging to a large number
of genera. In every case the Lecanopteris sporelings were irrevocably damaged by slugs
whilst those of the surrounding species had hardly been affected. It is unlikely
however that slugs would be predators in nature but the observation establishes the
palatability of the rhizome tissue which in nature is untouched.
Although the rhizome is green, little or no C02 exchange can take place through
the waxy cuticle. The presence of actively respiring ants in the chambers of the green
rhizome could then be an advantage.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This material was collected on a British Museum  Newcastle University  Kew
expedition carried out with the cooperation of the National Biological Institute,
Indonesia. ACJ would like to thank the Trustees of the Museum and TGW the Nuffield
Foundation for helping to finance this expedition as part of larger research projects.
We would particularly like to thank Dr Mien Rifai, Director, Herbarium Bogoriense for
his help as liaison officer both in Sulawesi and elsewhere in Indonesia.
